the summer olympic games (french: jeux olympiques d'été)[1] or the games of the olympiad, first held in 1896, is a major international multi-sport event held once every four years. the most recent olympics were held in rio de janeiro, brazil. the international olympic committee (ioc) organises the games and oversees the host city's preparations. in each olympic event, gold medals are awarded for first place, silver medals are awarded for second place, and bronze medals are awarded for third place; this tradition began in 1904. the winter olympic games were created out of the success of the summer olympics.
the olympics have increased in scope from a 42 competition event programme with fewer than 250 male competitors from 14 nations in 1896, to 306 events with 11,238 competitors (6,179 men, 5,059 women) from 206 nations in 2016.
the summer olympics has been hosted on five continents by a total of nineteen countries. the games have been held four times in the united states (1904, 1932, 1984, and 1996), three times in the united kingdom (1908, 1948, and 2012), twice each in greece (1896 and 2004), france (1900 and 1924), germany (1936 and 1972), and australia (1956 and 2000), and once each in sweden (1912), belgium (1920), netherlands (1928), finland (1952), italy (1960), japan (1964), mexico (1968), canada (1976), soviet union (1980), south korea (1988), spain (1992), china (2008), and brazil (2016).
the ioc has selected tokyo, japan, for a second time, to host the summer olympics in 2020. the 2024 summer olympics will be held in paris, france, for a third time, exactly one hundred years after the city's last summer olympics in 1924. the ioc has also selected los angeles, california, to host its third summer games in 2028.
to date, only five countries have participated in every summer olympic games – australia, france, great britain, greece, and switzerland. the united states leads the all-time medal table for the summer olympics.
the united states has hosted the summer olympic games four times: the 1904 games was held in st. louis, missouri; the 1932 and 1984 games were both held in los angeles, california, and the 1996 games were held in atlanta, georgia. the 2028 games in los angeles will mark the fifth occasion on which the summer games have been hosted by the u.s.
in 2012, the united kingdom hosted its third summer olympic games in the capital city, london, which became the first city ever to have hosted the summer olympic games three times. the cities of los angeles, paris, and athens have each hosted two summer olympic games. in 2024, france will host its third summer olympic games in its capital, making paris the second city ever to have hosted three summer olympics. in 2028, los angeles will become the third city ever to have hosted the games three times.
australia, france, germany and greece have all hosted the summer olympic games twice. the ioc has selected tokyo, japan, to host the 2020 summer olympics, when it will become the first city outside the western world to have hosted the summer olympics more than once, having already hosted the games in 1964. the other countries that have hosted the summer olympics are belgium, brazil, china, canada, finland, italy, mexico, netherlands, south korea, spain, soviet union, and sweden; each of these countries has hosted the summer games on just one occasion.
asia has hosted the summer olympics three times, in tokyo, japan (1964), seoul, south korea (1988), and beijing, china (2008); asia will host the games for the fourth time in 2020 when tokyo again becomes host city. historically, the summer olympics has been held predominantly in english-speaking countries and european nations.[2] tokyo will be the first city outside these regions to have hosted the summer olympics twice; it will also be the largest city ever to have hosted the games, having grown considerably since 1964.
the 2016 games in rio de janeiro, brazil, were the inaugural summer olympics to be held in south america and the inaugural that was held during the local "winter" season. the only two countries in the southern hemisphere to have hosted the summer olympics have been australia (1956 and 2000) and brazil (2016). africa has yet to host a summer olympics.
stockholm, sweden, has hosted events at two summer olympics, having been sole host of the 1912 games, and hosting the equestrian events at the 1956 summer olympics (which they are credited as jointly hosting with melbourne, australia).[3] amsterdam, netherlands, has also hosted events at two summer olympic games, having been sole host of the 1928 games and previously hosting two of the sailing races at the 1920 summer olympics. at the 2008 summer olympics, hong kong provided the venues for the equestrian events, which took place in sha tin and kwu tung.
the modern olympic games were founded in 1894 when pierre de coubertin sought to promote international understanding through sporting competition. he based his olympics on the wenlock olympian society annual games, which had been contested in much wenlock since 1850.[4] the first edition of de coubertin's games, held in athens in 1896, attracted just 245 competitors, of whom more than 200 were greek, and only 14 countries were represented. nevertheless, no international events of this magnitude had been organised before. female athletes were not allowed to compete, though one woman, stamata revithi, ran the marathon course on her own, saying "if the committee doesn't let me compete i will go after them regardless".[5]
the 1896 summer olympics, officially known as the games of the olympiad, was an international multi-sport event which was celebrated in athens, greece, from 6 to 15 april 1896. it was the first olympic games held in the modern era. about 100,000 people attended for the opening of the games. the athletes came from 14 nations, with most coming from greece. although greece had the most athletes, the u.s. finished with the most champions. 11 americans placed first in their events vs. the 10 from greece.[6] ancient greece was the birthplace of the olympic games, consequently athens was perceived to be an appropriate choice to stage the inaugural modern games. it was unanimously chosen as the host city during a congress organised by pierre de coubertin, a french pedagogue and historian, in paris, on 23 june 1894. the ioc was also established during this congress.
despite many obstacles and setbacks, the 1896 olympics were regarded as a great success. the games had the largest international participation of any sporting event to that date. panathinaiko stadium, the first big stadium in the modern world, overflowed with the largest crowd ever to watch a sporting event.[7] the highlight for the greeks was the marathon victory by their compatriot spiridon louis, a water carrier. he won in 2 hours 58 minutes and 50 seconds, setting off wild celebrations at the stadium. the most successful competitor was german wrestler and gymnast carl schuhmann, who won four gold medals.
greek officials and the public were enthusiastic about the experience of hosting an olympic games. this feeling was shared by many of the athletes, who even demanded that athens be the permanent olympic host city. the ioc intended for subsequent games to be rotated to various host cities around the world. the second olympics was held in paris.[8]
four years later the 1900 summer olympics in paris attracted more than four times as many athletes, including 20 women, who were allowed to officially compete for the first time, in croquet, golf, sailing, and tennis. the games were integrated with the paris world's fair and lasted over 5 months. it is still disputed which events exactly were olympic, since few or maybe even none of the events were advertised as such at the time.
tensions caused by the russo–japanese war and the difficulty of getting to st. louis may have contributed to the fact that very few top-ranked athletes from outside the us and canada took part in the 1904 games.[9]
a series of smaller games were held in athens in 1906. the ioc does not currently recognise these games as being official olympic games, although many historians do. the 1906 athens games were the first of an alternating series of games to be held in athens, but the series failed to materialise. the games were more successful than the 1900 and 1904 games, with over 900 athletes competing, and contributed positively to the success of future games.
the 1908 london games saw numbers rise again, as well as the first running of the marathon over its now-standard distance of 42.195  km (26 miles 385 yards). the first olympic marathon in 1896 (a male-only race) was raced at a distance of 40  km (24 miles 85 yards). the new marathon distance was chosen to ensure that the race finished in front of the box occupied by the british royal family. thus the marathon had been 40 km (24.9 mi) for the first games in 1896, but was subsequently varied by up to 2 km (1.2 mi) due to local conditions such as street and stadium layout. at the six olympic games between 1900 and 1920, the marathon was raced over six distances. the games saw great britain winning 146 medals, 99 more than second-placed americans, its best result to this day.
at the end of the 1908 marathon, the italian runner dorando pietri was first to enter the stadium, but he was clearly in distress and collapsed of exhaustion before he could complete the event. he was helped over the finish line by concerned race officials, but later he was disqualified, and the gold medal was awarded to john hayes, who had trailed him by around 30 seconds.
the games continued to grow, attracting 2,504 competitors, to stockholm in 1912, including the great all-rounder jim thorpe, who won both the decathlon and pentathlon. thorpe had previously played a few games of baseball for a fee, and saw his medals stripped for this breach of amateurism after complaints from avery brundage. they were reinstated in 1983, 30 years after his death. the games at stockholm were the first to fulfil pierre de coubertin's original idea. for the first time since the games started in 1896 were all five inhabited continents represented with athletes competing in the same stadium.
the scheduled 1916 summer olympics were cancelled following the onset of world war i.
the 1920 antwerp games in war-ravaged belgium were a subdued affair, but again drew a record number of competitors. this record only stood until 1924, when the paris games involved 3,000 competitors, the greatest of whom was finnish runner paavo nurmi. the "flying finn" won three team gold medals and the individual 1,500 and 5,000 meter runs, the latter two on the same day.[citation needed]
the 1928 amsterdam games was notable for being the first games which allowed females to compete at track & field athletics, and benefited greatly from the general prosperity of the times alongside the first appearance of sponsorship of the games, from the coca-cola company. the 1928 games saw the introduction of a standard medal design with the ioc choosing giuseppe cassioli's depiction of greek goddess nike and a winner being carried by a crowd of people. this design was used up until 1972.[citation needed]
the 1932 los angeles games were affected by the great depression, which contributed to the low number of competitors (the fewest since the st. louis games).[citation needed]
the 1936 berlin games were seen by the german government as a golden opportunity to promote their ideology. the ruling nazi party commissioned film-maker leni riefenstahl to film the games. the result, olympia, was widely considered to be a masterpiece, despite hitler's theories of aryan racial superiority being repeatedly shown up by "non-aryan" athletes. in particular, african-american sprinter and long jumper jesse owens won four gold medals. the 1936 berlin games also saw the reintroduction of the torch relay.[10]
due to world war ii, the games of 1940 (due to be held in tokyo and temporarily relocated to helsinki upon the outbreak of war) were cancelled. the games of 1944 were due to be held in london but were also cancelled; instead, london hosted the first games after the end of the war, in 1948.
the first post-war games were held in 1948 in london, with both germany and japan excluded. dutch sprinter fanny blankers-koen won four gold medals on the track, emulating owens' achievement in berlin.
at the 1952 games in helsinki the ussr team competed for the first time and immediately became one of the dominant teams (finishing second both in the number of gold and overall medals won). soviet immediate success might be explained by the advent of the state-sponsored "full-time amateur athlete". the ussr entered teams of athletes who were all nominally students, soldiers, or working in a profession, but many of whom were in reality paid by the state to train on a full-time basis, hence violating amateur rules.[11][12] finland made a legend of an amiable czechoslovak army lieutenant named emil zátopek, who was intent on improving on his single gold and silver medals from 1948. having first won both the 10,000 and 5,000-meter races, he also entered the marathon, despite having never previously raced at that distance. pacing himself by chatting with the other leaders, zátopek led from about halfway, slowly dropping the remaining contenders to win by two and a half minutes, and completed a trio of wins.
the 1956 melbourne games were largely successful, barring a water polo match between hungary and the soviet union, which the soviet invasion of hungary caused to end as a pitched battle between the teams. due to a foot-and-mouth disease outbreak in britain at the time and the strict quarantine laws of australia, the equestrian events were held in stockholm.
at the 1960 rome games a young light-heavyweight boxer named cassius clay, later known as muhammad ali, arrived on the scene. ali would later throw his gold medal away in disgust after being refused service in a whites-only restaurant in his home town of louisville, kentucky.[13] he was awarded a new medal 36 years later at the 1996 olympics in atlanta. other performers of note in 1960 included wilma rudolph, a gold medallist in the 100 meters, 200 meters and 4 × 100 meters relay events.
the 1964 games held in tokyo are notable for heralding the modern age of telecommunications. these games were the first to be broadcast worldwide on television, enabled by the recent advent of communication satellites. the 1964 games were thus a turning point in the global visibility and popularity of the olympics. judo debuted as an official sport, and dutch judoka anton geesink created quite a stir when he won the final of the open weight division, defeating akio kaminaga in front of his home crowd.
performances at the 1968 mexico city games were affected by the altitude of the host city.[14] the 1968 games also introduced the now-universal fosbury flop, a technique which won american high jumper dick fosbury the gold medal. in the medal award ceremony for the men's 200 meter race, black american athletes tommie smith (gold) and john carlos (bronze) took a stand for civil rights by raising their black-gloved fists and wearing black socks in lieu of shoes. they were banned by the ioc. věra čáslavská, in protest to the 1968 soviet-led invasion of czechoslovakia and the controversial decision by the judges on the balance beam and floor, turned her head down and away from the soviet flag whilst the anthem played during the medal ceremony. she returned home as a heroine of the czechoslovak people but was made an outcast by the soviet-dominated government.
politics again intervened at munich in 1972, with lethal consequences. a palestinian terrorist group named black september invaded the olympic village and broke into the apartment of the israeli delegation. they killed two israelis and held 9 others as hostages. the terrorists demanded that israel release numerous prisoners. when the israeli government refused their demand, a tense stand-off ensued while negotiations continued. eventually, the captors, still holding their hostages, were offered safe passage and taken to an airport, where they were ambushed by german security forces. in the firefight that followed, 15 people, including the nine israeli athletes and five of the terrorists, were killed. after much debate, it was decided that the games would continue, but proceedings were obviously dominated by these events.[15] some memorable athletic achievements did occur during these games, notably the winning of a then-record seven gold medals by united states swimmer mark spitz, lasse virén (of finland)'s back-to-back gold in the 5,000 meters and 10,000 meters, and the winning of three gold medals by soviet gymnastic star olga korbut - who achieved a historic backflip off the high bar. korbut, however, failed to win the all-around, losing to her teammate ludmilla tourischeva.
there was no such tragedy in montreal in 1976, but bad planning and fraud led to the games' cost far exceeding the budget. the montreal games were the most expensive in olympic history, until the 2014 winter olympics, costing over $5 billion (equivalent to $21.45 billion in 2018). for a time, it seemed that the olympics might no longer be a viable financial proposition. in retrospect, the belief that contractors (suspected of being members of the montreal mafia) skimmed large sums of money from all levels of contracts while also profiting from the substitution of cheaper building materials of lesser quality, may have contributed to the delays, poor construction and excessive costs. in 1988, one such contractor, giuseppe zappia "was cleared of fraud charges that resulted from his work on olympic facilities after two key witnesses died before testifying at his trial."[16] there was also a boycott by african nations to protest against a recent tour of apartheid-run south africa by the new zealand national rugby union team. the romanian gymnast nadia comăneci won the women's individual all-around gold medal with two of four possible perfect scores, this giving birth to a gymnastics dynasty in romania. she also won two other individual events, with two perfect scores in the balance beam and all perfect scores in the uneven bars. lasse virén repeated his double gold in the 5,000 meters and 10,000 meters, making him the first athlete to ever win the distance double twice.
following the soviet union's 1979 invasion of afghanistan, 66 nations, including the united states, canada, west germany, and japan, boycotted the 1980 games held in moscow. eighty nations were represented at the moscow games – the smallest number since 1956. the boycott contributed to the 1980 games being a less publicised and less competitive affair, which was dominated by the host country.
in 1984 the soviet union and 13 soviet allies reciprocated by boycotting the 1984 summer olympics in los angeles. romania, notably, was one of the nations in the eastern bloc that did attend the 1984 olympics. these games were perhaps the first games of a new era to make a profit. although a boycott led by the soviet union depleted the field in certain sports, 140 national olympic committees took part, which was a record at the time.[17] the games were also the first time mainland china (people's republic) participated.
according to british journalist andrew jennings, a kgb colonel stated that the agency's officers had posed as anti-doping authorities from the ioc to undermine doping tests and that soviet athletes were "rescued with [these] tremendous efforts".[18] on the topic of the 1980 summer olympics, a 1989 australian study said "there is hardly a medal winner at the moscow games, certainly not a gold medal winner, who is not on one sort of drug or another: usually several kinds. the moscow games might as well have been called the chemists' games."[18]
documents obtained in 2016 revealed the soviet union's plans for a statewide doping system in track and field in preparation for the 1984 summer olympics in los angeles. dated prior to the country's decision to boycott the games, the document detailed the existing steroids operations of the program, along with suggestions for further enhancements.[19] the communication, directed to the soviet union's head of track and field, was prepared by dr. sergei portugalov of the institute for physical culture. portugalov was also one of the main figures involved in the implementation of the russian doping program prior to the 2016 summer olympics.[19]
the 1988 games, in seoul, was very well planned but the games were tainted when many of the athletes, most notably men's 100 metres winner ben johnson, failed mandatory drug tests. despite splendid drug-free performances by many individuals, the number of people who failed screenings for performance-enhancing chemicals overshadowed the games.
the 1992 barcelona games featured the admittance of players from one of the north american top leagues, the nba, exemplified by but not limited to us basketball's "dream team". the 1992 games also saw the reintroduction to the games of several smaller european states which had been incorporated into the soviet union since world war ii. at these games, gymnast vitaly scherbo set an inaugural medal record of five individual gold medals at a summer olympics, and equaled the inaugural record set by eric heiden at the 1980 winter olympics.
by then the process of choosing a location for the games had become a commercial concern; there were widespread allegations of corruption potentially affecting the ioc's decision process.
an the atlanta 1996 summer olympics, the highlight was 200 meters runner michael johnson annihilating the world record in front of a home crowd. canadians savoured donovan bailey's recording gold medal run in the 100-meter dash. this was popularly felt to be an appropriate recompense for the previous national disgrace involving ben johnson. there were also emotional scenes, such as when muhammad ali, clearly affected by parkinson's disease, lit the olympic torch and received a replacement medal for the one he had discarded in 1960. the latter event took place in the basketball arena. the atmosphere at the games was marred, however, when a bomb exploded during the celebration in centennial olympic park. in june 2003, the principal suspect in this bombing, eric robert rudolph, was arrested.
the 2000 summer olympics was held in sydney, australia, and showcased individual performances by local favorite ian thorpe in the pool, briton steve redgrave who won a rowing gold medal in an unprecedented fifth consecutive olympics, and cathy freeman, an indigenous australian whose triumph in the 400 meters united a packed stadium. eric "the eel" moussambani, a swimmer from equatorial guinea, received wide media coverage when he completed the 100 meter freestyle swim in by far the slowest time in olympic history. he nevertheless won the heat as both his opponents had been disqualified for false starts. his female compatriot paula barila bolopa also received media attention for her record-slow and struggling but courageous performance. the sydney games also saw the first appearance of a joint north and south korean contingent at the opening ceremonies, though they competed as different countries. controversy occurred in the women's artistic gymnastics when the vaulting horse was set to the wrong height during the all-around competition.
in 2004 the games returned to their birthplace in athens, greece. greece spent at least $7.2 billion on the games, including $1.5 billion on security. michael phelps won his first medals in olympic games tallying 6 gold and 2 bronze medals. pyrros dimas, winning a bronze medal, became the most decorated weightlifter of all time with 3 golds and 1 bronze in olympic games. although unfounded reports of potential terrorism drove crowds away from the preliminary competitions of the first weekend of the games (14–15 august), attendance picked up as the games progressed. a third of the tickets failed to sell,[20] but ticket sales still topped figures from seoul and barcelona olympics.[citation needed] ioc president jacques rogge characterised greece's organisation as outstanding and its security precautions as flawless.[21] the athens games witnessed all 202 nocs participate with over 11,000 participants.
the 2008 summer olympics was held in beijing, people's republic of china. several new events were held, including the new discipline of bmx for both men and women. for the first time, women competed in the steeplechase. the fencing program was expanded to include all six events for both men and women. women had not previously been able to compete in team foil or sabre events, although women's team épée and men's team foil were dropped for these games. marathon swimming events, over the distance of 10 km (6.2 mi), were added. in addition, the doubles events in table tennis were replaced by team events.[22] american swimmer michael phelps set a record for gold medals at a single games with eight, and tied the record of most gold medals by a single competitor previously held by both heiden and scherbo. another major star of the games was jamaican sprinter usain bolt, who became the first male athlete ever to set world records in the finals of both the 100 and 200  metres in the same games. equestrian events were held in hong kong.
london held the 2012 summer olympics, becoming the first city to host the games three times. in his closing address, jacques rogge described the games as "happy and glorious". the host nation won 29 gold medals, the best haul for great britain since the 1908 games in london. the united states returned to the top of the medal table after china dominated in 2008. the ioc had removed baseball and softball from the 2012 program. on a commercial level, the games were successful as they were the first in history to completely sell out every ticket, with as many as 1 million applications for 40,000 tickets for both the opening ceremony and the 100m men's sprint final. such was the demand for tickets to all levels of each event, there was controversy when seats set aside for sponsors and national delegations went unused in the early days. a system of reallocation was put in place so the empty seats were filled throughout the games.
rio de janeiro, brazil hosted the 2016 summer olympics, becoming the third city in the southern hemisphere to host the olympiads after melbourne, australia, in 1956 and sydney, australia, in 2000, and the first south american city to host the olympics. the preparation for these games was overshadowed by controversies, including the instability of brazil's federal government; the country's economic crisis; health and safety concerns surrounding the zika virus and significant pollution in the guanabara bay; and a state-sponsored doping scandal involving russia, which affected the participation of its athletes in the games.[23] tokyo, japan will host the 2020 summer olympics, making it the inaugural asian city to host the two olympiads.
forty-two sports, spanning 55 disciplines, have been part of the olympic program at one point or another. twenty-eight sports have comprised the schedule for three of the recent games, 2000, 2004, and 2008 summer olympics. due to the removal of baseball and softball, there was a total of twenty-six sports in the 2012 games.[24]
the various olympic sports federations are grouped under a common umbrella association, called the association of summer olympic international federations (asoif).
qualification rules for each of the olympic sports are set by the international sports federation (if) that governs that sport's international competition.[25]
for individual sports, competitors typically qualify by attaining a certain place in a major international event or on the if's ranking list. there is a general rule that a maximum of three individual athletes may represent each nation per competition. national olympic committees (nocs) may enter a limited number of qualified competitors in each event, and the noc decides which qualified competitors to select as representatives in each event if more have attained the benchmark than can be entered.[25][26]
nations most often qualify teams for team sports through continental qualifying tournaments, in which each continental association is given a certain number of spots in the olympic tournament. each nation may be represented by no more than one team per competition; a team consists of just two people in some sports.
summer olympic sports are divided into five categories (a – e) based on popularity, gauged by six criteria: television viewing figures (40%), internet popularity (20%), public surveys (15%), ticket requests (10%), press coverage (10%), and number of national federations (5%). the category of a sport determines the share of olympic revenue received by that sport's international federation.[27][28] sports that were new to the 2016 olympics (rugby and golf) have been placed in category e.
the current categories are:
the table below uses official data provided by the ioc.[29]
^ a: the ioc site for the 1900 olympic games[31] gives erroneous figure of 95 events, while the ioc database for the 1900 olympic games[32] lists 85. probably this discrepancy in ioc data is consequence that the figure 95 just derived from the "1900 olympic games — analysis and summaries"[33] publication of bill mallon, who used his own determination of which sports and events should be considered as olympic.
^ b: the ioc site for the 1904 olympic games[34] gives erroneous figure of 91 events, while the ioc database for the 1904 olympic games[35] lists 94. probably this discrepancy in ioc data is consequence that the figure 91 just derived from the "1904 olympic games — analysis and summaries"[36] publication of bill mallon, who used his own determination of which sports and events should be considered as olympic.
^ c: the ioc site for the 1920 olympic games[37] gives erroneous figure of 154 events, while the ioc database for the 1920 olympic games[38] lists 156.
^ d: owing to australian quarantine laws, 6 equestrian events were held in stockholm several months before the rest of the 1956 games in melbourne, 5 nations from 72 competed in the equestrian events in stockholm, but did not attend the games in melbourne.
^ e: the ioc site for the 1956 olympic games[39] gives total of 151 events (145 events in melbourne and 6 equestrian events in stockholm).
note: although the games of 1916, 1940, and 1944 had been cancelled, the roman numerals for those games were still used because the summer games' official titles count olympiads, not the games themselves, per the olympic charter. this contrasts with the winter olympics, which ignore the cancelled winter games of 1940 & 1944 in their numeric count.

the 1896 summer olympics (greek: θερινοί ολυμπιακοί αγώνες 1896, romanized: therinoí olympiakoí agónes 1896), officially known as the games of the i olympiad, was the first international olympic games held in modern history. organised by the international olympic committee (ioc), which had been created by pierre de coubertin, it was held in athens, greece, from 6 to 15 april 1896.
fourteen nations and 241, all male, athletes took part in the games. participants were all european, or living in europe, with the exception of the united states team. winners were given a silver medal, while runners-up received a copper medal. retroactively, the ioc has converted these to gold and silver, and awarded bronze medals to third placed athletes. ten of the 14 participating nations earned medals. the united states won the most gold medals, 11, host nation greece won the most medals overall, 46. the highlight for the greeks was the marathon victory by their compatriot spyridon louis. the most successful competitor was german wrestler and gymnast carl schuhmann, who won four events.
athens had been unanimously chosen to stage the inaugural modern games during a congress organised by coubertin in paris on 23 june 1894, during which the ioc was also created, because greece was the birthplace of the ancient olympic games. the main venue was the panathenaic stadium, where athletics and wrestling took place; other venues included the neo phaliron velodrome for cycling, and the zappeion for fencing. the opening ceremony was held in the panathenaic stadium on 6 april, during which most of the competing athletes were aligned on the infield, grouped by nation. after a speech by the president of the organising committee, crown prince constantine, his father officially opened the games. afterwards, nine bands and 150 choir singers performed an olympic hymn, composed by spyridon samaras, with words by poet kostis palamas.
the 1896 olympics were regarded as a great success. the games had the largest international participation of any sporting event to that date. the panathenaic stadium overflowed with the largest crowd ever to watch a sporting event.[4] after the games, coubertin and the ioc were petitioned by several prominent figures, including greece's king george and some of the american competitors in athens, to hold all the following games in athens. however, the 1900 summer olympics were already planned for paris and, except for the intercalated games of 1906, the olympics did not return to greece until the 2004 summer olympics, 108 years later.
during the 19th century, several small-scale sports festivals across europe were named after the ancient olympic games. the 1870 olympics at the panathenaic stadium, which had been refurbished for the occasion, had an audience of 30,000 people.[5] pierre de coubertin, a french pedagogue and historian, adopted dr william penny brookes' idea to establish a multi-national and multi-sport event—the ancient games only allowed male athletes of greek origin to participate.[6][7] in 1890, coubertin wrote an article in la revue athletique, which espoused the importance of much wenlock a rural market town in the english county of shropshire. it was here that, in october 1850, the local physician william penny brookes had founded the wenlock olympian games, a festival of sports and recreations that included athletics and team sports, such as cricket, football and quoits.[8] coubertin also took inspiration from the earlier greek games organised under the name of olympics by businessman and philanthropist evangelis zappas in 1859, 1870 and 1875.[9] the 1896 athens games were funded by the legacies of evangelis zappas and his cousin konstantinos zappas[10][11][12] and by george averoff[13] who had been specifically requested by the greek government, through crown prince constantine, to sponsor the second refurbishment of the panathenaic stadium. this the greek government did despite the fact that the cost of refurbishing the stadium in marble had already been funded in full by evangelis zappas forty years earlier.[14]
with deep feeling towards baron de coubertin's courteous petition, i send him and the members of the congress, with my sincere thanks, my best wishes for the revival of the olympic games.on 18 june 1894, coubertin organised a congress at the sorbonne, paris, to present his plans to representatives of sports societies from 11 countries. following his proposal's acceptance by the congress, a date for the first modern olympic games needed to be chosen. coubertin suggested that the games be held concurrently with the 1900 universal exposition of paris. concerned that a six-year waiting period might lessen public interest, congress members opted instead to hold the inaugural games in 1896. with a date established, members of the congress turned their attention to the selection of a host city. it remains a mystery how athens was finally chosen to host the inaugural games. in the following years both coubertin and demetrius vikelas would offer recollections of the selection process that contradicted the official minutes of the congress. most accounts hold that several congressmen first proposed london as the location, but coubertin dissented. after a brief discussion with vikelas, who represented greece, coubertin suggested athens. vikelas made the athens proposal official on 23 june, and since greece had been the original home of the olympics, the congress unanimously approved the decision. vikelas was then elected the first president of the newly established international olympic committee (ioc).[16]
news that the olympic games would return to greece was well received by the greek public, media, and royal family. according to coubertin, "the crown prince constantine learned with great pleasure that the games will be inaugurated in athens." coubertin went on to confirm that, "the king and the crown prince will confer their patronage on the holding of these games." constantine later conferred more than that; he eagerly assumed the presidency of the 1896 organising committee.[17]
however, the country had financial troubles and was in political turmoil. the job of prime minister alternated between charilaos trikoupis and theodoros deligiannis frequently during the last years of the 19th century. because of this financial and political instability, both prime minister trikoupis and stephanos dragoumis, the president of the zappas olympic committee, which had attempted to organise a series of national olympiads, believed that greece could not host the event.[18] in late 1894, the organising committee under stephanos skouloudis presented a report that the cost of the games would be three times higher than originally estimated by coubertin. they concluded the games could not be held, and offered their resignation. the total cost of the games was 3,740,000 gold drachmas.[19]
with the prospect of reviving the olympic games very much in doubt, coubertin and vikelas commenced a campaign to keep the olympic movement alive. their efforts culminated on 7 january 1895 when vikelas announced that crown prince constantine would assume the presidency of the organising committee. his first responsibility was to raise the funds necessary to host the games. he relied on the patriotism of the greek people to motivate them to provide the required finances.[20] constantine's enthusiasm sparked a wave of contributions from the greek public. this grassroots effort raised 330,000 drachmas. a special set of postage stamps were commissioned; the sale of which raised 400,000 drachmas. ticket sales added 200,000 drachmas. at the request of constantine, businessman george averoff agreed to pay for the restoration of the panathenaic stadium. averoff would donate 920,000 drachmas[13] to this project.[21] as a tribute to his generosity, a statue of averoff was constructed and unveiled on 5 april 1896 outside the stadium. it stands there to this day.[22]
some of the athletes would take part in the games because they happened to be in athens at the time the games were held, either on holiday or for work (e.g., some of the british competitors worked for the british embassy). a designated olympic village for the athletes did not appear until the 1932 summer olympics. consequently, the athletes had to provide their own lodging.
the first regulation voted on by the new ioc in 1894 was to allow only amateur athletes to participate in the olympic games.[23] the various contests were thus held under amateur regulations with the exception of fencing matches.[24] the rules and regulations were not uniform, so the organising committee had to choose among the codes of the various national athletic associations. the jury, the referees and the game director bore the same names as in antiquity (ephor, helanodic and alitarc). prince george acted as final referee; according to coubertin, "his presence gave weight and authority to the decisions of the ephors."[25]
women were not entitled to compete at the 1896 summer olympics, because de coubertin felt that their inclusion would be "impractical, uninteresting, unaesthetic and incorrect".[26]
seven venues were used for the 1896 summer olympics. panathenaic stadium was the main venue, hosting four of the nine sports contested. the city of marathon served as host to the marathon event and the individual road race events. swimming was held in the bay of zea, fencing at the zappeion, sport shooting at kallithea, and tennis at the athens lawn tennis club. tennis was a sport unfamiliar to greeks at the time of the 1896 games.[27]
the bay of zea is a seaport and marina in the athens area;[28] it was used as the swimming venue because the organizers of the games wanted to avoid spending money on constructing a special purpose swimming venue.[29]
four of the 1896 venues were reused as competition venues for the 2004 games. the velodrome would be renovated into a football stadium in 1964 and was known as karaiskakis stadium.[30] this venue was renovated in 2003 for use as a football venue for the 2004 games.[31] during the 2004 games, panathinaiko stadium served as host for archery competitions and was the finish line for the athletic marathon event.[32] the city of marathon itself served as the starting point for both marathon events during the 2004 games.[33] the zappeion served as the first home of the organizing committee (athoc) for the 2004 games from 1998 to 1999, and served as the main communications center during those games.[34][35]

‡ the iconic olympic rings symbol was not designed by baron pierre de coubertin  until 1912.

on 6 april (25 march according to the julian calendar then in use in greece), the games of the first olympiad were officially opened; it was easter monday for both the western and eastern christian churches and the anniversary of greece's independence.[42] the panathenaic stadium was filled with an estimated 80,000 spectators, including king george i of greece, his wife olga, and their sons. most of the competing athletes were aligned on the infield, grouped by nation. after a speech by the president of the organising committee, crown prince constantine, his father officially opened the games with the words (in greek):[43]
"i declare the opening of the first international olympic games in athens. long live the nation. long live the greek people."afterwards, nine bands and 150 choir singers performed an olympic hymn, composed by spyridon samaras, with words by poet kostis palamas. thereafter, a variety of musical offerings provided the backgrounds to the opening ceremonies until 1960, since which time the samaras/palamas composition has become the official olympic anthem (decision taken by the ioc session in 1958). other elements of current olympic opening ceremonies were initiated later: the olympic flame was first lit in 1928, the first athletes' oath was sworn at the 1920 summer olympics, and the first officials' oath was taken at the 1972 olympic games.[43]
at the 1894 sorbonne congress, a large roster of sports were suggested for the program in athens. the first official announcements regarding the sporting events to be held featured sports such as football and cricket,[44] but these plans were never finalised, and these sports did not make the final list for the games.[45] rowing and yachting were also scheduled, but were cancelled due to poor weather on the planned day of competition.[46]
as a result, the 1896 summer olympics programme featured 9 sports encompassing 10 disciplines and 43 events. the number of events in each discipline is noted in parentheses.
the athletics events had the most international field of any of the sports. the major highlight was the marathon, held for the first time in international competition. spyridon louis, a previously unrecognised water carrier, won the event to become the only greek athletics champion and a national hero. although greece had been favoured to win the discus and the shot put, the best greek athletes finished just behind the american robert garrett in both events.[4]
no world records were set, as few top international competitors had elected to compete. in addition, the curves of the track were very tight, making fast times in the running events virtually impossible. despite this, thomas burke, of the united states, won the 100-meter race in 12.0 seconds and the 400-meter race in 54.2 seconds. burke was the only one who used the "crouch start" (putting his knee on soil), confusing the jury. eventually, he was allowed to start from this "uncomfortable position".[47]
chile claims one athlete, luis subercaseaux, competed for the nation at the 1896 summer olympics. this makes chile one of the 14 nations to appear at the inaugural summer olympic games. subercaseaux's results are not listed in the official report, though that report typically includes only winners and subercaseaux won no medals.[48][48] a study conducted by chilean forensic police decided (by use of facial recognition), that subercaseaux was the participant in a famous photo of 100 meters second series.[49]
the day after the official marathon stamata revithi ran the 40-kilometer course in 5 hours 30 minutes,[50] finishing outside panathinaiko stadium. she was denied entry into the official race as the 1896 olympics excluded women from competition.[51]
the rules of the international cycling association were used for the cycling competitions.[52] the track cycling events were held at the newly built neo phaliron velodrome. only one road event was held, a race from athens to marathon and back (87 kilometres).
in the track events, the best cyclist was frenchman paul masson, who won the one lap time trial, the sprint event, and the 10,000 meters. in the 100 kilometres event, masson entered as a pacemaker for his compatriot léon flameng. flameng won the event, after a fall, and after stopping to wait for his greek opponent georgios kolettis to fix a mechanical problem. the austrian fencer adolf schmal won the 12-hour race, which was completed by only two cyclists, while the road race event was won by aristidis konstantinidis.[53]
the fencing events were held in the zappeion, which, built with money evangelis zappas had given to revive the ancient olympic games, had never seen any athletic contests before.[54] unlike other sports (in which only amateurs were allowed to take part at the olympics), professionals were authorised to compete in fencing, though in a separate event. these professionals were considered gentlemen athletes, just as the amateurs.[25]
four events were scheduled, but the épée event was cancelled for unknown reasons. the foil event was won by a frenchman, eugène-henri gravelotte, who beat his countryman, henri callot, in the final.[54] the other two events, the sabre and the masters foil, were won by greek fencers. leonidas pyrgos, who won the latter event, became the first greek olympic champion in the modern era.
the gymnastics competition was carried out on the infield of the panathinaiko stadium. germany had sent an 11-man team, which won five of the eight events, including both team events. in the team event on the horizontal bar, the german team was unopposed. three germans added individual titles: hermann weingärtner won the horizontal bar event, alfred flatow won the parallel bars; and carl schuhmann, who also competed successfully in wrestling, won the vault. louis zutter, a swiss gymnast, won the pommel horse, while greeks ioannis mitropoulos and nikolaos andriakopoulos were victorious in the rings and rope climbing events, respectively.[55]
a regatta of sailing boats was on the program of the games of the first olympiad for 31 march 1896. however this event had to be given up.
the official english report states:
the regatta could not take place because some special boats embarkation had not been provided for.the german version gives a bit more clues:
die wettkämpfe im segeln wurden vereitelt, da man weder bei uns die besonderen boote dafür besass, noch fremde bewerber sich gemeldet hatten.held at a range at kallithea, the shooting competition consisted of five events—two using a rifle and three with the pistol. the first event, the military rifle, was won by pantelis karasevdas, the only competitor to hit the target with all of his shots. the second event, for military pistols, was dominated by two american brothers: john and sumner paine became the first siblings to finish first and second in the same event. to avoid embarrassing their hosts, the brothers decided that only one of them would compete in the next pistol event, the free pistol. sumner paine won that event, thereby becoming the first relative of an olympic champion to become olympic champion himself.[56]
the paine brothers did not compete in the 25-meter pistol event, as the event judges determined that their weapons were not of the required calibre. in their absence, ioannis phrangoudis won. the final event, the free rifle, began on the same day. however, the event could not be completed due to darkness and was finalised the next morning, when georgios orphanidis was crowned the champion.[56]
the swimming competition was held in the open sea because the organizers had refused to spend the money necessary for a specially constructed stadium. nearly 20,000 spectators lined the bay of zea off the piraeus coast to watch the events. the water in the bay was cold, and the competitors suffered during their races. there were three open events (men's 100-metre freestyle, men's 500-metre freestyle, and men's 1200 metre freestyle), in addition to a special event open only to greek sailors, all of which were held on the same day (11 april).[53]
for alfréd hajós of hungary, this meant he could only compete in two of the events, as they were held too close together, which made it impossible for him to adequately recuperate. nevertheless, he won the two events in which he swam, the 100 and 1200 meter freestyle. hajós later became one of only two olympians to win a medal in both the athletic and artistic competitions, when he won a silver medal for architecture in 1924. the 500-meter freestyle was won by austrian swimmer paul neumann, who defeated his opponents by more than a minute and a half.
although tennis was already a major sport by the end of the 19th century, none of the top players turned up for the tournament in athens. the competition was held at the courts of the athens lawn tennis club, and the infield of the velodrome used for the cycling events. john pius boland, who won the event, had been entered in the competition by a fellow-student of his at oxford; the greek, konstantinos manos. as a member of the athens lawn tennis sub-committee, manos had been trying, with the assistance of boland, to recruit competitors for the athens games from among the sporting circles of oxford university. in the first round, boland defeated friedrich traun, a promising tennis player from hamburg, who had been eliminated in the 100-meter sprint competition. boland and traun decided to team up for the doubles event, in which they reached the final and defeated their greek and egyptian opponents after losing the first set.[57]
the sport of weightlifting was still young in 1896, and the rules differed from those in use today. competitions were held outdoors, in the infield of the main stadium, and there were no weight limits. the first event was held in a style now known as the "clean and jerk". two competitors stood out: scotsman launceston elliot and viggo jensen of denmark. both of them lifted the same weight; but the jury, with prince george as the chairman, ruled that jensen had done so in a better style. the british delegation, unfamiliar with this tie-breaking rule, lodged a protest. the lifters were eventually allowed to make further attempts, but neither lifter improved, and jensen was declared the champion.[58]
elliot got his revenge in the one hand lift event, which was held immediately after the two-handed one. jensen had been slightly injured during his last two-handed attempt, and was no match for elliot, who won the competition easily. the greek audience was charmed by the scottish victor, whom they considered very attractive. a curious incident occurred during the weightlifting event: a servant was ordered to remove the weights, which appeared to be a difficult task for him. prince george came to his assistance; he picked up the weight and threw it a considerable distance with ease, to the delight of the crowd.[58]
no weight classes existed for the wrestling competition, held in the panathenaic stadium, which meant that there would only be one winner among competitors of all sizes. the rules used were similar to modern greco-roman wrestling, although there was no time limit, and not all leg holds were forbidden (in contrast to current rules).
apart from the two greek contestants, all the competitors had previously been active in other sports. weightlifting champion launceston elliot faced gymnastics champion carl schuhmann. the latter won and advanced into the final, where he met georgios tsitas, who had previously defeated stephanos christopoulos. darkness forced the final match to be suspended after 40 minutes; it was continued the following day, when schuhmann needed only fifteen minutes to finish the bout.[59]
on the morning of sunday 12 april (or 3 april, according to the julian calendar then used in greece), king george the great organised a banquet for officials and athletes (even though some competitions had not yet been held). during his speech, he made clear that, as far as he was concerned, the olympics should be held in athens permanently. the official closing ceremony was held the following wednesday, after being postponed from tuesday due to rain. again the royal family attended the ceremony, which was opened by the national anthem of greece and an ode composed in ancient greek by george s. robertson, a british athlete and scholar.[60]
afterwards, the king awarded prizes to the winners. unlike today, the first-place winners received a silver medal, an olive branch and a diploma, while runners-up received a copper medal, a laurel branch, and diploma.[61][62] third place winners did not receive a prize.
some winners also received additional prizes, such as spyridon louis, who received a cup from michel bréal, a friend of coubertin, who had conceived the marathon event. louis then led the medalists on a lap of honour around the stadium, while the olympic hymn was played again. the king then formally announced that the first olympiad was at an end, and left the stadium, while the band played the greek national hymn and the crowd cheered.[60]
like the greek king, many others supported the idea of holding the next games in athens; most of the american competitors signed a letter to the crown prince expressing this wish. coubertin, however, was heavily opposed to this idea, as he envisioned international rotation as one of the cornerstones of the modern olympics. according to his wish, the next games were held in paris, although they would be somewhat overshadowed by the concurrently held universal exposition.[63]
the concept of national teams was not a major part of the olympic movement until the intercalated games 10 years later, though many sources list the nationality of competitors in 1896 and give medal counts. there are significant conflicts with regard to which nations competed. the international olympic committee gives a figure of 14, but does not list them.[43] the following 14 are most likely the ones recognised by the ioc. some sources list 12, excluding chile and bulgaria; others list 13, including those two but excluding italy. egypt is also sometimes included because of dionysios kasdaglis' participation. belgium and russia had entered the names of competitors, but withdrew.
national olympic committees did not yet exist. over 65% of all athletes were greek.
ten of the 14 participating nations earned medals, in addition to three medals won by mixed teams, i.e. teams made up of athletes from multiple nations. the ioc has retroactively assigned gold, silver and bronze medals to the three best placed athletes in each event to comport with more recent traditions.[71] the united states won the most gold medals* (11), while host nation greece won the most medals overall (46) as well as the most silver* (17) and bronze* (19) medals, finishing with one fewer gold medal than the united states, having 155 athletes more than the us.[71]
to sort this table by nation, total medal count, or any other column, click on the  icon next to the column title.
key
  host nation (greece)

the 1900 summer olympics (french: les jeux olympiques d'été de 1900), today officially known as the games of the ii olympiad, was an international multi-sport event that took place in paris, france, in 1900. no opening or closing ceremonies were held; competitions began on 14 may and ended on 28 october.
the games were held as part of the 1900 world's fair. in total, 997 competitors took part in 19 different sports.[1] this number relies on certain assumptions about which events were and were not "olympic". many athletes, among them some who won events, didn't know that they had competed in the olympic games. women took part in the games for the first time, and sailor hélène de pourtalès, born helen barbey in new york city,[2] became the first female olympic champion. the decision to hold competitions on a sunday brought protests from many american athletes, who travelled as representatives of their colleges and were expected to withdraw rather than compete on their religious day of rest.
at the sorbonne conference of 1894, pierre de coubertin  proposed that the olympic games should take place in 1900 in paris. the delegates to the conference were unwilling to wait six years and lobbied to hold the first games in 1896. a decision was made to hold the first olympic games in 1896 in athens and that paris would host the second celebration.
most of the winners in 1900 did not receive medals, but were given cups or trophies. professionals competed in fencing and albert robert ayat (france), who won the épée for amateurs and masters, was awarded a prize of 3000 francs.
some events were contested for the only time in the history of the games, including automobile and motorcycle racing,[3] ballooning,[4] cricket,[5] croquet,[6] basque pelota,[7] and 200m swimming obstacle race and underwater swimming.[8] this was also the only olympic games in history to use live animals (pigeons) as targets during the shooting event.[9]
the host nation of france fielded 72% of all athletes (720 of the 997) and won the most gold, silver and bronze medal placings. u.s. athletes won the second-most in each, while fielding fewer than 8% of the participants (75 of 997).[10]
the 1900 games were held as part of the 1900 exposition universelle. the baron de coubertin believed that this would help public awareness of the olympics and submitted elaborate plans to rebuild the ancient site of olympia, complete with statues, temples, stadia and gymnasia. the director of the exposition universelle, alfred picard, thought holding an ancient sport event at the exposition universelle was an "absurd anachronism".[11] after thanking de coubertin for his plans, picard filed them away and nothing more came of it.
a committee was formed for the organization of the games, consisting of some of the more able sports administrators of the day and a provisional program  was drawn up. sports to be included at the games were track and field athletics, swimming, wrestling, gymnastics, fencing, french and british boxing, river and ocean yacht racing, cycling, golf, lifesaving, archery, weightlifting, rowing, diving and water polo.
british and irish sports associations announced a desire to compete, as did a number of powerful american universities and sports clubs. competitors from russia and australia also confirmed their intentions to travel to paris.
on 9 november 1898, the union des sociétés françaises de sports athlétiques ("union of the french societies for athletic sports" or usfsa) put out an announcement that it would have sole right to any organised sport held during the world's fair. it was an empty threat but viscount charles de la rochefoucauld, the nominated head of the organizing committee, stepped down rather than be embroiled in the political battle.
the baron de coubertin, who was also secretary-general of the usfsa, was urged to withdraw from active involvement in the running of the games and did so, only to comment later, "i surrendered – and was incorrect in doing so."
the ioc ceded control of the games to a new committee which was to oversee every sporting activity connected to the 1900 exposition universelle. alfred picard appointed daniel mérillon, the head of the french shooting association, as president of this organization in february 1899. mérillon proceeded to publish an entirely different schedule of events, with the result that many of those that had made plans to compete in concordance with the original program withdrew, and refused to deal with the new committee.
between may and october 1900, the new organizing committee held an enormous number of sporting activities alongside the paris exposition. the sporting events rarely used the term of "olympic". indeed, the term "olympic games" was replaced by "concours internationaux d'exercices physiques et de sport" ("international physical exercises and sports" in english) in the official report of the sporting events of the 1900 exposition universelle. the press reported competitions variously as "international championships", "international games", "paris championships", "world championships" and "grand prix of the paris exposition".
de coubertin commented later to friends: "it's a miracle that the olympic movement survived that celebration".
the ioc has never decided which events were "olympic" and which were not.[12] in fact, pierre de coubertin had ceded that entire determination to the organizers.[13]  weightlifting and wrestling had been dropped since the 1896 summer olympics, while 13 new sports were added. swimming and water polo were considered to be two disciplines within a single sport of aquatics in the olympic context. among the sports below, only croquet was not an international competition, being contested by french players only. the number of events in each discipline is noted in parentheses.
more recently, the ioc website has affirmed a total of 95 medal events.[14] it appears that the ioc has accepted olympic historian bill mallon's recommendation for events that should be considered "olympic", based on four applied criteria.  these events include two additional cycling events, basque pelota and three of five additional sailing events, all of which appear in the ioc database. four other recommended events are included: two equestrian and two sailing events, not in the database.  these are reflected in the table below. complete acceptance of mallon' s recommendation would entail including one archery event (championnat du monde) and removing one shooting event (20 metre military pistol, which was an event for pros) from the database.[15]
14 venues were used at the 1900 summer olympics to host 20 sports.
the standard of competition at the games was variable. despite a poor quality track, a strong
contingent of top-class american collegiate athletes ensured the track and field competitions were of the highest quality. the tennis gold medalists were all former wimbledon champions, swimming and fencing events were of a good standard and even polo, a minority sport for the social elite, was well represented by some of the best players in the game. other sports were noticeably weak in both quality and depth. only athletics, swimming and fencing had competitors from more than ten nations.
the history of the archery competition at the 1900 olympics is one of confusion. the ioc currently lists six events with olympic status, but a case has been made that as many as eight other events equally deserve to be considered part of official olympic history. about 150 archers competed in the six events that later had official status conferred.  however, as many as 5,000 were involved in archery competition in conjunction with the 1900 world's fair. belgian hubert van innis took two gold medals and one silver and would add to his tally twenty years later in antwerp.
the track and field events were held at the home of the racing club de france at the
croix-catelan stadium in bois de boulogne. no track was laid and races took place on an uneven
field of grass littered with trees. additional events were held for professionals and a series of handicap races also took place. these are not considered official olympic events.
in the seven events contested over 400 metres or less, the united states took 13 out of a possible 21 medals. athletes from columbia university, princeton university and the university of pennsylvania all won gold medals. indeed, two would-be dentists from the university of pennsylvania were among the stars of the games. alvin kraenzlein won 4 individual gold medals, a feat that has never repeated, while walter tewksbury took five medals including two golds. the hurdles in the 400 m hurdle race were 30-foot (9.1 m)-long telegraph poles arranged on the track and the race, uniquely in olympic competition, had a water jump on the final straight. adolphe klingelhoeffer, who had brazilian citizenship in 1900, competed for france in three events.
united states dominance in sprinting was matched in the longer track races by united kingdom.
only george orton, who won canada's first olympic title in the shorter of the two steeplechases, ruined a perfect record for the british. orton won his title less than an hour after placing third in the 400 metre hurdles.
the most contentious of all the events in these games began and ended in the bois de boulogne. intended to follow the track of the old city wall, the course was poorly marked out and runners often got lost and had to double back on themselves before continuing. on some parts of the course, runners had to contend with distractions from cars, bicycles, pedestrians and animals. arthur newton of the united states finished fifth but stated he had not been passed by any other runner during the race. another american, richard grant, claimed he was run down by a cyclist as he made ground on the leaders. french honour seemed to have been satisfied when michel théato crossed the finish line and a military band struck up la marseillaise. however, modern research has revealed that théato was born in luxembourg and maintained luxembourgian citizenship throughout his life.
the hungarian discus thrower rudolf bauer was the only non-american crowned as olympic champion. american domination was even greater in the field events than the track events, with outstanding performances coming from ray ewry and irving baxter. ewry started his olympic career with a sweep of the three standing jumps, while baxter finished second to ewry three times and won both the regular high jump and pole vault. meyer prinstein became the first jewish olympic gold medalist in the triple jump.[citation needed]
the chistera form of the game was played at this, the sport's only appearance at full olympic level. two pairs entered and the spanish partnerships of amezola and villota became their nations' first olympic champions. the mano form of the game and a chistera tournament for professional players were contested unofficially.
after the withdrawal of teams from the netherlands and belgium, only two teams played in the cricket tournament. a team made up of players from the albion cricket club and the standard athletic club, two paris clubs consisting almost exclusively of british expatriates, played a touring team from the southwest of england. the devon and somerset wanderers were no more than a team of competent club cricketers (made up from blundells school old boys and members of castle cary cricket club), and only montagu toller and alfred bowerman were deemed good enough to play at county level for somerset. the game was played before a small crowd at the vélodrome de vincennes. an emphatic second innings bowling performance from toller captured victory for the visitors as time appeared to be running out for them. if the french had held out for five more minutes the game would have declared a draw.[27] knowledge of the game would have been lost but for the forethought of john symes, a member of the victorious team, who kept a scorecard in his own writing.
the croquet tournament was notable as it marked the first appearance of women at olympic level. madame desprès, madame filleul-brohy and mademoiselle ohier were eliminated in the first round of competition. all players were french. a single paying spectator attended the tournament, an elderly english gentleman who travelled from nice for the early stages. an unofficial two-ball handicap competition was also held.
the home nation won six of the nine medals available. a number of unofficial events were held for both amateurs and professionals.
equestrian sport made its debut at the olympic games with three jumping events being held, plus two other events. the italian rider gian giorgio trissino won a gold and a silver. he narrowly missed making olympic history by winning two medals in the same event. competing with two different horses in the high jump, he jointly won the gold medal and finished in 4th place on his second horse.
nineteen nations were represented in the fencing competition, which was held in a field near
the cutlery exhibit at the 1900 world's fair.  french fencers dominated the proceedings but both cuba and italy also took titles. the early rounds of the foil competitions were judged on style rather than the actual result of the contest. this meant that some fencers were eliminated without losing a contest while others were defeated and still progressed to the next rounds.
the first football champions at the olympics were the london amateurs of upton park f.c.  a crowd of around 500 spectators saw them defeat their french rivals.
margaret ives abbott, a student of art from chicago, played in and won a nine-hole golf
tournament on an october tuesday in paris. she died in 1955 without being aware that the
tournament was part of the olympic games and she had become america's first ever female
olympic champion.
135 gymnasts took part in a competition that involved elements from track and field and
weightlifting as well as gymnastic disciplines
eight separate tournaments were held in 1900 as part of the 1900 world's fair. only the grand prix internationale de l'exposition is counted as an official medal event. entries were from clubs rather than countries, and the winning foxhunters club comprised english, irish and american players.
mexico won its first medal in this sport, a bronze won by guillermo hayden wright, marquez de villavieja and three brothers: eustaquio de escandón y barron, pablo de escandón y barron and manuel de  escandón y barron.
competitions were held on the river seine. the coxed fours descended into farce when officials changed the qualifying criteria for the final several times. the first final was held without any of the original qualifiers, who had withdrawn as a protest against the decision to run six boats on a course laid out for only four. the officials then decided to run another "final" for the boycotting crews. both events are considered official olympic competitions. in a number of events crews saw the advantage of having ultra-lightweight coxswain and recruited local boys for the period of the games. most of these remain a mystery; some could have been under ten years old.
three teams competed in the rugby tournament. a french representative team defeated a team from the german city of frankfurt and moseley wanderers from england. the moseley team had played a full game of rugby in england the day before they made the journey to paris. they arrived in the morning, played the match in the afternoon and were back in their home country by the next morning. the proposed game between the british and german sides was cancelled, and both are credited as silver medalists. the franco-haitian centre constantin henriquez become the first black gold medalist.
the 1900 sailing regatta differs from every other olympic regatta in a number of ways.
in most classes there were two distinct "finals", boats were assigned time handicaps according to their weight within each class and cash prizes were handed out to the winner of each race. the ioc initially recognized the winner of the first race in each class as olympic champion except in the case of the 10-20 ton class, which was decided on aggregate time over three races. however currently the participants of both first and second races in 3 classes (0-0.5t, 1-2t and 2-3t) are present in the ioc database as medalists, so the second races in these 3 classes were recognized by the ioc, as recommended by olympic historian bill mallon.[15] to support the ioc recognized total of 95 medal events, it appears that one more race in each of 2 other classes (0.5-1t and 3-10t) has been recognized by the ioc, per mallon's suggestion. thus, for five of the eight events, two gold, two silver and two bronze medals were retrospectively awarded. races were held at both meulan and le havre and medals shared among five nations. france and great britain were the most successful of the countries involved. a number of people named as members of medal-winning crews by the ioc have been proved not to have competed; others have their participation seriously questioned by historical research.
switzerland's konrad stäheli was the outstanding marksman of the games, taking a trio of titles and leading his country to the top of the shooting medal table. the medals were shared between six different nations. there is a debate as to whether the live pigeon shooting event was a full olympic event, belgian leon lunden shot twenty-one birds on his way to the championship. up to thirty unofficial shooting events were also held, most involving professional marksmen. research has shown that one of the medal events in the ioc database (25m rapid fire pistol, also called military pistol cat. 6) was contested by professionals.[15]
the muddied waters of the seine hosted the swimming events in 1900. run with the current, the races produced very fast times by the standards of the day. john arthur jarvis of great britain, frederick lane of australia and the german ernst hoppenberg each won two titles. lane received a 50-pound bronze statue of a horse as a prize. a couple of unusual events were held. the obstacle race required both swimming underneath and climbing over rows of boats while charles de venville stayed submerged for over a minute to
win the underwater swimming event.
a high quality men's tournament saw three past or future wimbledon champions reach the semi-finals. laurence doherty reached the final when older brother reggie stepped aside and let his sibling advance to the final. the two refused to play each other in what they considered a minor tournament. on the 11th of july a landmark was reached in the history of the olympic games. charlotte cooper, already three times wimbledon champion, took the singles championship to become the first individual female olympic champion, also winning the mixed doubles event.
a combined sweden/denmark team, made up of three competitors from each country, defeated the french team to win the title. one of the members of the french team was born in colombia. they were left as the only participating teams; the united states  had entered but were forced to scratch as three of their team were involved in the final of the hammer. edgar aaybe  was a journalist covering the games for the danish newspaper politiken and was asked to join the team when another puller was taken ill.
osborne swimming club, representing great britain were unchallenged in the tournament,
scoring 29 goals and conceding only 3 in their 3 matches. in the final, they limited the number
of shots on goal to avoid humiliating their opponents. one of its team members was from new zealand.  thomas william burgess of the bronze
medal-winning libellule de paris team, represented great britain in the swimming events.
the 1900 games were not governed by a specific olympic organizing committee, but instead held as an appendage to the 1900 world's fair. an enormous number of events was held, though many fall short of the standards later required for olympic championship status. decisions as to which olympic events are termed "official" and which have "unofficial" or "demonstration" status are usually left to the olympic organizing committees and/or the ioc. in the absence of any overall authority capable of making an official distinction of this kind, no decision as to the official status of any event was made at the time of the games. a document from 1912 exists, listing results from the 1900 games, but the reliability and authenticity of this paper is questioned by olympic historians. this document formed the original basis of the results of the paris games in the ioc database.[28] however, the ioc has never decided which events were "olympic" and which were not.[12]
all events satisfying all four of these retrospective selection criteria — restricted to amateurs, international participation, open to all competitors and without handicapping — are now regarded as olympic events, except for those in one sport — ballooning. croquet, motorboating and boules satisfied three criteria (all had only french players). only croquet has been accorded olympic status.[15] (one of the ten croquet players, marcel haëntjens, had been thought to have been belgian. thus the croquet events were considered as international.  despite the flemish name, haëntjens was french.)  like all the olympic events widely regarded as official, there were other events conducted during the 1900 world's fair.[29][30][12]
in addition to these, 71 scholastic and 92 military events were also held across a range of sports.
according to an international olympic committee imprint, 24 nations sent competitors to the 1900 olympic games.[1] modern research shows that athletes from the following 28 countries participated in the games:[15][32]
some sources also list athletes from the following nations as having competed at these games.
other modern nations could be considered to have competed in some form in 1900. algeria, croatia, ireland, poland and slovakia had athletes competing, but none of these were independent at the time. algeria was part of france and sent four gymnasts who competed for france. what is now the republic of ireland was then part of great britain and had athletes who competed in athletics, polo, sailing and tennis. a croatian fencer represented austria, a polish fencer for russia and a pair of slovaks competed for hungary[15]
the concept of "national teams" chosen by national olympic committees did not exist at this point in time.
gold medals were not given at the 1900 games; instead, most of the winners were given cups or trophies. in some events, a silver medal was given for first place and a bronze medal was given for second. the international olympic committee has retrospectively assigned gold, silver and bronze medals to competitors who earned 1st, 2nd and 3rd-place finishes, respectively, in order to bring early olympics in line with current awards.[15] for olympic games before 1908 there is no universally accepted definition of nationality, and medal tables may vary depending on the chosen definition. for example, australian stanley rowley competed as part of a team selected by the amateur athletic association of england. the concept of "national teams" chosen by national olympic committees did not exist at this point in time.
these are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1900 games.
key
  host nation (france)

the 1904 summer olympics, officially known as the games of the iii olympiad, was an international multi-sport event which was celebrated in st. louis, missouri, united states from august 29 until september 3, 1904, as part of an extended sports program lasting from july 1 to november 23, 1904,located at what is now known as francis field on the campus of washington university in st. louis. it was the first time that the olympic games were held outside europe. boxing, the oldest combat sport, was introduced.[2]
tensions caused by the russo–japanese war and the difficulty of getting to st. louis in 1904 may have contributed to the fact that very few top ranked athletes from outside the us and canada took part in these games. only 62 of the 651 athletes who competed came from outside north america, and only 12–15 nations were represented in all. some events combined the u.s. national championship with the olympic championship.[3]
the current three-medal (gold, silver, and bronze for first, second, and third places) format was introduced at the 1904 olympics.
chicago won the bid to host the 1904 summer olympics,[4] but the organizers of the louisiana purchase exposition in st. louis would not accept another international event in the same timeframe.
the exposition organization began to plan for its own sports activities, informing the chicago ocog that its own international sports events intended to eclipse the olympic games unless they were moved to st. louis. pierre de coubertin, the founder of the modern olympic movement, stepped in and awarded the games to st. louis.
boxing, dumbbells, freestyle wrestling and the decathlon made their debuts. the swimming events were held in a temporary pond near skinker and wydown boulevards, where "lifesaving demonstrations" of unsinkable lifeboats for ocean liners took place. the organizers of the world's fair held "anthropology days" on august 12 and 13.
one of the most remarkable athletes was the american gymnast george eyser, who won six medals even though his left leg was made of wood, and frank kugler won four medals in freestyle wrestling, weightlifting and tug of war, making him the only competitor to win a medal in three different sports at the same olympic games.
chicago runner james lightbody won the steeplechase and the 800 m and then set a world record in the 1500 m. harry hillman won both the 200 m and 400 m hurdles and also the flat 400 m. sprinter archie hahn was champion in the 60 m, 100 m and 200 m. in this last race, he set an olympic record in 21.6, a record that stood for 28 years. in the discus, after american martin sheridan had thrown exactly the same distance as his compatriot, ralph rose (39.28 m), the judges gave them both an extra throw to decide the winner. sheridan won the decider and claimed the gold medal. ray ewry again won all three standing jumps.
the team representing great britain was awarded a total of two medals, both won by irish athletes. the top non-usa athlete was emil rausch of germany, who won three swimming events. zoltan halmay of hungary and charles daniels of the united states each won two swimming gold medals. galt football club from canada won the gold medal in football.
94 events[5] in 17 disciplines, comprising 16 sports, were part of the olympic program in 1904. swimming and diving are considered two disciplines of the same sport, aquatics. the number of events in each discipline is noted in parentheses.
basketball, hurling, american football and baseball were featured as demonstration sports. gaelic football was also an unofficial demonstration sport at the 1904 olympics.
water polo is also mentioned in the games reports for the 1904 summer olympics. however, it was not considered at the time to be a demonstration sport and, even though it has since been classified as such, it has not been included retrospectively in the ioc's official medal database.
five sports venues were used for the 1904 summer olympics. the venues included the first golf course constructed west of the mississippi river. three of the sports venues were on the site for the louisiana purchase exposition which was being held concurrently with the olympics. glen echo country club became the first golf course west of the mississippi river when it opened in 1901.[6] it is still in use as of 2017. forest park was where the louisiana purchase exhibition took place, and it hosted the diving, swimming, and water polo events on the life saving exhibition lake.[7][8][9] during the water polo events, several of the cattle from a world's fair livestock exhibit were allowed to enter the lake, on the opposite side from the swimming and water polo events. within one year, four of those athletes died of typhus.[10]
creve coeur lake became the first park of st. louis county in 1945.[11] the lake has hosted rowing regattas since 1882 and still hosts them as of 2010.[12][13] francis field and gymnasium are still in use on the washington university in st. louis campus as of 2019.[14][15] an ornamental gate commemorating the 1904 games was constructed outside the stadium immediately after the exposition.[14] a swimming pool was added to the gymnasium in 1985.[15] forest park, constructed in 1876, is still in use as of 2018 and attracts over 12 million visitors annually.[16] glen echo country club remains in use as a golf course today as of 2018.[6]
athletes from twelve nations competed in st. louis. numbers in parentheses indicate the number of known competitors for each nation.[21] due to the difficulty of getting to st. louis in 1904, and european tensions caused by the russo-japanese war, only 62 athletes from outside north america came to the olympics.
some sources also list athletes from the following nations as having competed at these games.
these are the top ten nations to win medals at the 1904 games.
the nationalities of some medalists are disputed, as many american competitors were recent immigrants to the united states who had not yet been granted us citizenship.
in 2009, historians from the international society of olympic historians discovered that cyclist frank bizzoni, formerly thought to be an american, was still an italian citizen when he competed in 1904, being granted us citizenship in 1917.[25]
the international olympic committee considers norwegian-american wrestlers charles ericksen and bernhoff hansen to have competed for the united states; each man won a gold medal. in 2012, norwegian historians however found documentation showing that ericksen did not receive american citizenship until march 22, 1905, and that hansen probably never received american citizenship. the historians have therefore petitioned the ioc to have the athletes registered as norwegians.[26][27]
in may 2013, it was reported that the norwegian olympic committee had filed a formal application for changing the nationality of the wrestlers in the ioc's medal database;[28] as of april 2019, no decision has yet been made.
francis gailey competed in 1904 as an australian, and immigrated to america in 1906, sailing to san francisco in the ss sonoma. he worked as a banker in california, lived for a time in ontario, canada, where he married mary adams, and finally settled in 1918 in southern california, managing orange-grove plantations.[29]
multi-medalist frank kugler of germany was a member of the st. louis southwest turnverein team, being granted us citizenship in 1913.[30]
gustav thiefenthaler was born in switzerland, but the family moved to the united states when he was young. he represented the south broadway ac in st. louis. at the olympics, tiefenthaler wrestled one bout and lost, but earned a bronze medal for his efforts.[31]
the ioc also lists french-american albert corey as a united states competitor for his marathon silver medal, but (together with four undisputed americans) as part of a mixed team for the team race silver medal.
the ioc counts one gold, one silver, and two bronze medals won by the american fencer van zo post for cuba instead of the united states. the ioc also shows charles tatham as cuban for individual fencing events and american for the team event, but he was an american.

the 1908 summer olympics, officially the games of the iv olympiad, were an international multi-sport event which was held in 1908 in london, united kingdom from 27 april to 31 october 1908.[2]
these games were originally scheduled to be held in rome, but relocation on financial grounds followed a disastrous eruption of mount vesuvius in 1906.[3] they were the fourth chronological modern summer olympics in keeping with the now-accepted four-year cycle as opposed to the alternate four-year cycle of the proposed intercalated games. the ioc president for these games was baron pierre de coubertin. lasting a total of 187 days, or 6 months and 4 days, these games were the longest in modern olympics history.
there were four bids for the 1908 summer olympics. rome was selected ahead of london, berlin and milan. the selection was made at the 6th ioc session in london in 1904.[4]
italian authorities were preparing to stage the games when mount vesuvius erupted on 7 april 1906, devastating the city of naples. funds were diverted to the reconstruction of naples, so a new host country was required. london was selected for the first time to hold the games which were held at white city alongside the franco-british exhibition, at the time the more noteworthy event.
the white city stadium, built in short time for the games, held 68,000 however only 65,000 people turned up to watch the games. the stadium track was three laps to the mile (536 metres), not the current standard of 400 metres, with a pool for swimming and diving and platforms for wrestling and gymnastics in the middle.[5]
the distance from the start of the marathon to the finish at the stadium was established at these games. the original distance of 25 miles was changed to 26 miles so the marathon could start at windsor castle and then changed again at the request of princess mary so the start would be beneath the windows of the royal nursery.[6] to ensure that the race would finish in front of the king, the finish line was moved by british officials who “felt compelled to restore the importance of the monarchy.” as a result of these changes, the marathon covered a distance of 26 miles 385 yards (42.195 km), which became the standard length starting with the 1924 summer olympics.[7]
there were controversies at the games. on the opening day, following the practice introduced at the intercalated games of 1906, teams paraded behind national flags. however, the arrangement caused complications:
the united states' flag bearer, ralph rose, refused to dip the flag to king-emperor edward vii in the royal box. his fellow athlete martin sheridan allegedly declared that "this flag dips to no earthly king." the quote is held as an example of irish and american defiance of the british monarchy, though it is historicity disputed.[8][9]
the 1908 olympics also prompted establishment of standard rules for sports, and selection of judges from different countries rather than just the host. one reason was the 400 metre race, in which a us runner, john carpenter, was accused by the british officials of interfering with a british runner. part of the problem was the different definition of interference under british and international rules (the events were held under british rules by the decision of the organising committee). the officials decided to disqualify carpenter and ordered a second final race without him. british halswelle was to face the other two finalists. these athletes, william robbins and john taylor, were both americans and decided not to participate in the repeat of the final to protest against the judges' decision. halswelle was thus the only medallist in the 400 metres.
the most famous incident of the games came at the end of the marathon. dorando pietri, italy, began his race at a rather slow pace, but in the second half of the course began a powerful surge moving him into second position by the 32 km (20 mi) mark, 4 minutes behind south african charles hefferon. when he knew that hefferon was in crisis, pietri further increased his pace, overtaking him at the 39 km (24 mi) mark.
the effort took its toll and with only two kilometres to go, pietri began to feel the effects of extreme fatigue and dehydration. when he entered the stadium, he took the wrong path and when umpires redirected him, he fell down for the first time. he got up with their help, in front of 75,000 spectators.
he fell four more times, and each time the umpires helped him up. in the end, though totally exhausted, he managed to finish the race in first place. of his total time of 2h 54min 46s, ten minutes were needed for that last 340 metres. second was american johnny hayes. the american team immediately lodged a complaint against the help pietri received from the umpires. the complaint was accepted and pietri was disqualified and removed from the final standings of the race. since he had not been responsible for his disqualification, queen alexandra awarded him a gilded silver cup the next day.
these games were the first to include winter events, as had originally been proposed for the games. there were four figure skating events, although held on 28 and 29 october, months after most of the other events.
oscar swahn from sweden, who won the gold medal for running deer shooting, became the oldest olympic champion of all time, and set another age record by being 72 years and 279 days old during his triumph at the 1920 summer olympics in antwerp, belgium. one of the more unusual shooting events in 1908 was olympic dueling. the discipline, which was an associate event (i.e. not official), was performed by facing opponents wearing protective clothing and masks and firing wax bullets.[10]
american john taylor was a member of the winning medley relay team, making him the first african-american athlete to win an olympic gold medal.[11] times for the winning team were united states (3:29.4): william hamilton-200 metres (22.0), nathaniel cartmell-200 metres (22.2), john taylor-400 metres (49.8), and melvin sheppard-800 metres (1:55.4).[12]
less than five months after returning from the olympic games in london, taylor died of typhoid fever on 2nd december 1908 at the age of 26.[13]
the budget of the organising committee showed a cost of £15,000; over one-third was labelled "entertainment expense". donations were the major source of revenue; only 28% of income derived from ticket sales. total receipts of £21,378 resulted in organisers claiming a profit. construction of the white city stadium, which cost the government about £60,000, was not counted.[14]
22 sports, representing 110 events in 24 sporting disciplines, were contested. swimming, diving and water polo are considered three disciplines of the same sport, aquatics. at the time, tug-of-war was part of athletics and the two different football codes (association and rugby (union)) were listed together. the international olympic committee now considers tug-of-war a separate sport, as well as referring to association football as simply "football" and to rugby union as "rugby".[15] in one of seven cycling events (cycling sprint) no medals were awarded. the sailing program was open for a total of five sailing classes, but actually only four sailing events were contested. the number of events in each discipline is noted in parentheses.
thirteen sports venues were used for the 1908 summer olympics. the first winter sports took place at prince's skating club. white city stadium served as a precursor to modern stadiums.[citation needed] the figure skating events did not take place at the next olympics in stockholm, but returned for the 1920 games in antwerp. they served as the precursor for the first winter olympics that took place in chamonix sixteen years later. white city served as the main venue for the 1934 british empire games (commonwealth games since 1978) and a venue for the 1966 fifa world cup before its demolition in 1985. the all england tennis and lawn club continues to serve as host for wimbledon's tennis events and is the only venue of the 1908 games to serve as one for the 2012 summer olympics.[16]
bisley and henley served as venues in the 1948 games when the olympics returned to london forty years later.[17]
the 1908 games featured athletes representing 22 national olympic committees. finland, turkey and new zealand (as part of the team from australasia) made their first appearance at the olympic games. the fact that the united kingdom competed as a single team was upsetting to some irish competitors, who felt that ireland should compete on its own, despite being part of the uk at the time. fearing an irish boycott, the authorities changed the name of the team to great britain/ireland, and in two sports, field hockey and polo, ireland participated as a separate country, winning silver medals in both.[32] irish athletes in the united states were not affected by this controversy, and many irish born athletes competed for the u.s. olympic team as members of the irish american athletic club. members of the irish american athletic club won ten of the u.s. olympic team's total 23 gold medals, or as many as the nations of france, germany and italy combined.
these are the top ten nations that won 
medals at the 1908 games.
  *   host nation (great britain)51°30′49″n 0°13′39″w﻿ / ﻿51.51362°n 0.22740°w﻿ / 51.51362; -0.22740coordinates: 51°30′49″n 0°13′39″w﻿ / ﻿51.51362°n 0.22740°w﻿ / 51.51362; -0.22740
the 1912 summer olympics (swedish: olympiska sommarspelen 1912), officially known as the games of the v olympiad, were an international multi-sport event held in stockholm, sweden, between 5 may and 22 july 1912.
twenty-eight nations and 2,408 competitors, including 48 women, competed in 102 events in 14 sports. with the exception of tennis (starting on 5 may) and football and shooting (both starting on 29 june), the games were held within a month with an official opening on 6 july. it was the last olympics to issue solid gold medals and, with japan's debut, the first time an asian nation participated. stockholm was the only bid for the games, and was selected in 1909.
the games were the first to have art competitions, women's diving, women's swimming, and the first to feature both the decathlon and the new pentathlon, both won by jim thorpe. electric timing was introduced in athletics, while the host country disallowed boxing. figure skating was rejected by the organizers because they wanted to promote the nordic games.
united states won the most gold medals (25), while sweden won the most medals overall (65).
following the 1908 summer olympics in london, the authorities in sweden immediately sought to ensure that the next games would be held there. there were two swedish members of the international olympic committee (ioc) at the time, viktor balck and clarence von rosen.[2] the pair proposed to the swedish governing bodies of athletics and gymnastics in order to ensure that they backed any potential bid. support was given by the national associations on 18 april 1909 for a bid to host the olympics in stockholm on the basis that suitable financial arrangements could be made.[3] king gustaf v was petitioned on 6 may 1909 following the publication of preliminary plans for the stockholm bid that the expected cost of hosting the games would be 415,000 kronor (£23,050 or $115,250). the government accepted the petition on behalf of the king and supported the bid.[3]
on 28 may, at the meeting of the ioc in berlin, the swedish representatives declared that they had full financial support for hosting the next games in stockholm. a deal was made with the german ioc representative on the basis that berlin would host the 1916 summer olympics. pierre de coubertin spoke at the meeting about his concerns that sweden should ensure that the games take place, as he did not want a repeat of the problems with italy hosting the 1908 games. he also expressed a desire that "the games must be kept more purely athletic; they must be more dignified, more discreet; more in accordance with classic and artistic requirements; more intimate, and, above all, less expensive."[4] the games were duly awarded to sweden to host in stockholm as the only nominated host city for the 1912 summer olympics.[4]
the news that stockholm was to host the 1912 olympics was received with enthusiasm by the swedish public. the organizing committee took de coubertin's words to heart, and aimed to achieve an olympic games which removed those elements which detracted from earlier games.[5] the committee was elected in the autumn of 1909, with balck voted as the president of the committee, and crown prince gustaf adolf selected as honorary president. the committee's first meeting took place on 7 october, and on 11 october they delegated the arrangements for the individual branches of sports to the relevant governing bodies in sweden.[6] there were four exceptions to this, with the game shooting, modern pentathlon and mountain ascents retained by the olympic committee, and the horse riding competitions being organized by prince carl, duke of västergötland, who was the inspector of the swedish cavalry.[7] altogether there were 187 members of these committees.[8]
the official invitation to compete in the games was issued on 18 november 1910 to 27 countries, either directly or through their representative on the ioc. a further 15 countries were to have been invited, but as they had no ioc representatives, the swedish authorities were unsure how to proceed.[9] once the organizing committee for the games received confirmation of the athletic associations in each of the 15 countries, they too were sent invitations.[10] some 61,800 entry forms were printed for the use of the various nations.[11]
free transport was arranged for the invited nations' equipment, and a discount of 50 percent was arranged for competitors and delegates on the state run railway.[11] a daily newspaper which only covered the olympics was arranged to be published during the games, in both english and swedish.[12] further arrangements were made for the general arrival of visitors in order to entertain them whilst they were not at the games; a pleasure garden was opened north of the olympic stadium, and a series of indoor tennis courts were converted into a restaurant.[12]
twelve sports venues were used in the 1912 summer olympics. this marked the first time that more than one venue would be used for the football tournament, which has been the case ever since.[citation needed] stockholm olympic stadium served as one of the equestrian venues for the 1956 summer olympics. råsunda stadium served as a venue for the 1958 fifa world cup and the 1995 fifa women's world cup. in the initial bid document it was identified that a new stadium would be needed, initially envisaged as being located in the östermalm athletic grounds. in order to save funds, it was expected that only one of the stadium's stands would be permanent, with the other three made of wood and dismantled following the games. the cost of that stadium was estimated at 235,000 kronor.[3] arrangements were made with the individual national committees to provide the use of östermalm athletic grounds and traneberg.[13]
the cycling road race was held around mälaren, the third largest lake in sweden.[14] the water events, including the swimming and the rowing, were held at djurgårdsbrunnsviken, where a stadium was built. kaknäs was already used as a shooting range, but alterations were needed to accommodate shooting events. although it was not used as the olympic stadium as originally intended, östermalm hosted the lawn tennis and fencing competitions after a tennis pavilion was moved there from another location.[15]
five other locations were considered in addition to the östermalm athletic grounds to locate the olympic stadium. the stockholm olympic stadium was built on the site of the former stockholm athletic grounds in order to retain the other locations for other uses during the games. by placing it to the north of the city, the olympic stadium was within the immediate vicinity of other pre-existing sporting venues. initial funding was given to the sum of 400,000 kr for a timber stadium but torben grut,[16] the architect, also drew up alternative plans for a stone stadium. following discussions with the swedish central association for the application of athletics, it was decided that the stone version should be built, and further funds were made available through a national lottery once guarantees were made that no further funding was to be asked for in order to build the stadium.[17] however it was found that the original estimate for the stone stadium would still be too expensive, and the plans were once more modified in order to simplify the design and reduce costs. an agreement was entered into with a contractor on 2 november 1910 that it would be transferred complete by 25 may 1912.[18]
the games of the v olympiad were opened on 6 july 1912. the swedish royal family left stockholm palace at 10:40am, and were received at the olympic stadium by members of the ioc.[30] three thousand competing athletes had already assembled in the nearby östermalm athletic grounds, and began to enter the stadium in alphabetical order by nation according to the swedish spelling. the swedish team entered last,[31] but unlike the later tradition,[32] the greek team did not enter first.[31]
a hymn was sung, a traditional swedish chant was conducted and prayers were read first in swedish and then in english.[31] crown prince gustaf adolf addressed the king on behalf of the swedish olympic association.[33] king gustav v then declared the games officially open by a long speech:
it is with legitimate joy and pride that we swedes see athletes from every part of the world gathered here with us. it is a great honour for sweden that stockholm has been chosen as the scene of the fifth olympiad, and i bid all of you, athletes and friends of athletics, a most hearty welcome to this friendly contest of the nations. may the grand thought that found expression in the olympic games in classic times be so held in honour by our age too, that these competitions may become a powerful means to promote the physical health and development of every people. with these words, i herewith declare the olympic games of stockholm opened.afterwards a trumpet fanfare was played and the crown prince called for cheers for the king.[34] the athletes in their national groups marching out of the stadium in order ended the ceremony.[35]
the swedish delegation at the ioc meeting in berlin on 28 may 1909 had proposed a simple olympic schedule containing only "pure" athletics, swimming, gymnastics and wrestling. however other countries requested that the schedule be more comprehensive,[36] and with that in mind they put forward a further programme at the ioc meeting in 1911 which was met with approval. the sports which were added were the tug of war, cycling, fencing, football, horse riding, lawn tennis, rowing, shooting, skating and yacht racing.[37][38] the question of adding skating to the programme was discussed once more on 7 february 1910, with the decision being made to drop it from the schedule. it was felt to be unsuitable because it was a winter sport, and it was to be part of the nordic games the following year.[38] boxing was removed from the programme as it was unappealing to the swedes.[39] art competitions were considered at a further meeting on 14 february 1910,[38] and were subsequently added to the programme,[40] but now art competitions are no longer regarded as official olympic events by the international olympic committee.
as a result, now the 1912 summer olympics programme considered composed of 14 sports encompassing 18 disciplines and 102 events. the number of events in each discipline is noted in parentheses.
the athletic events saw the introduction of an fully automatic timing system developed by r. carlstedt. it involved attaching electromagnets to chronometers in a system which attached a control lamp to the starting gun for each race. this resulted in the firing of the gun starting a timer which was then stopped by one of the judges at the finishing line.[41] the final of the men's 100 metres was expected to be a mostly american affair, and it ended up with six athletes, only one of whom was not from the united states. it suffered from seven false starts before the athletes finally got away, with ralph craig winning the gold medal by 60 centimetres (24 in) in front of second place alvah meyer. donald lippincott won bronze, 15 cm behind second man.[42][43]
kanakuri shizō, a japanese marathon runner, went missing during the race. he lost consciousness by heatstroke and a farming family helped him to stop at a party taking place in a villa on the marathon route in order to quench his thirst, then caught a train to stockholm and left the country the next day. he returned to japan without notifying race officials. 50 years later, after being invited back by the swedish authorities, he completed the race with an (unofficial) time of 54 years, 8 months, 6 days, 8 hours, 32 minutes and 20.3 seconds.[44] portuguese francisco lázaro died from heat exhaustion while running the marathon, the only athlete to die during the running of an olympic marathon.[45]
american jim thorpe won the pentathlon and the newly created decathlon. thorpe's gold medals were stripped by the international olympic committee in 1913, after the ioc learned that thorpe had taken expense money for playing baseball, violating olympic amateurism rules, before the 1912 games.  this moved everyone else up in the rankings.  in 1982, the ioc was convinced that the disqualification had been improper, as no protest against thorpe's eligibility had been brought within the required 30 days, and reinstated thorpe's medals. the replicas were presented to his children in 1983, 30 years after thorpe's death.[46][46][47]
new olympic records were set in the majority of track and field events, with only the men's 200 metres, 10 km walk, standing high jump, standing broad jump, hop, step and jump, and the hurdle competitions failing to have new records set. hannes kolehmainen was the most successful in setting records at the games, with new olympic records set in the 5,000, 10,000 metre and cross country races.[48]
the cycling events at the 1912 games were limited to a road race around lake mälaren, which had already been a successful route for a yearly cycling race.[49] although not originally in the schedule, several countries requested that track cycling be added;[49] however, the organizing committee stuck by their plans not to build a new track cycling stadium as the only one in stockholm had been destroyed in order for the olympic stadium to be built.[50] in addition, germany had specifically requested cycle-polo and figure-cycling to be added to the programme, both of which requests were turned down by the committee.[51]
it was decided to hold the road race as a time trial, and to outlaw any non-competitive cyclists acting as pacemakers.[51] nineteen nations entered 151 athletes into the competition, which was a greater number than expected by the committee.[52] the largest group was from great britain, who had entered twelve competitors from england, another twelve from scotland, and a further nine from ireland.[53] the race began on 7 july, with the athletes leaving in groups. the first group left at 2am, with the remaining groups leaving at intervals of two minutes.[54] the distance raced was 318 kilometres (198 mi), with south african rudolph lewis winning the gold medal in the individual race. frederick grubb of great britain won the silver medal, and carl schutte of the united states won the bronze.[55] however, the average positions of the swedish team were better than their competitors', and so the swedish team won the gold medal for the team competition. the silver and bronze medals followed the individual victories, going to great britain and the united states respectively – giving grubb and schutte a second medal each of the same varieties.[56]
all of the medals in the men's competitions were split between the diving teams of the swedish and german teams. the men's high dive was a swedish white out, with swedish divers taking all three medal positions. erik adlerz took the gold medal,[57] and proceeded to take the gold medal for sweden in the 10 metre platform too. albert zürner took the silver for germany, and gustaf blomgren won the bronze medal for sweden.[58] another white out occurred in the 3 metre springboard with all three medals going to the german team, with paul günther taking gold, hans luber in the silver medal position and kurt behrens in bronze.[58] a 10-metre platform event also took place for women, with sweden taking two more medals, greta johansson in gold and lisa regnell in silver. great britain's isabelle white won the bronze medal. the remaining finalists were all from sweden.[59]
equestrian made its first appearance at a modern olympics in the 1912 games.[60] although competitions involving horse riding had been included in the programme of 1900, this was the first appearance of modern olympic staples such as dressage, eventing and show jumping. it was expected that the competitors would be military personnel as they would have had the cavalry experience to compete.[60] the competition was split between the military competitions,[61] prize riding and prize jumping.[62][63]
in the military competition, seven countries put forward competitors for the individual and team eventing. each nation put forward four athletes with the exception of denmark, which only put forward three. some of the countries also nominated reserves in addition to their main athletes. the total length of the course was 55 kilometres (34 mi) with the start and finish both in the grounds of the field riding club. the heat was such on the day of the event that competitors lost as much as 4.5 pounds (2.0 kg)in weight.[61] swede axel nordlander won the individual competition, and led the swedish eventing team to victory as well, earning himself two gold medals. in second place in the individual competition was german friedrich von rochow, who also earned a second silver medal as the team from germany placed second overall. only the bronze medals were split up between nationalities, with the american team taking the bronze for the team event while frenchman jacques cariou won the individual medal.[64]
two additional countries entered for the dressage, although only sweden entered the maximum number of competitors.[62] the event resulted in sweden taking all three medals, with the gold going to carl bonde, the silver to gustaf adolf boltenstern and the bronze to hans von blixen-finecke.[65] the individual show jumping competition was the only individual equestrian event at the 1912 olympics in which sweden won no medals, with the gold medal instead going to cariou of the french to add to his bronze medal from the dressage, rabod von kröcher taking the silver for germany, and emmanuel de blommaert winning the bronze for belgium.[65] the team event saw sweden take another gold medal, with the french team second and the german team, featuring prince friedrich karl of prussia, in the bronze medal position.[66]
the foil competition became a full olympic event, having appeared at the 1908 games as a demonstration sport.[67] nedo nadi and pietro speciale of italy took the gold and silver medals respectively, and richard verderber of austria placed third.[68] there were individual and team events in both épée and sabre. the épée team event saw belgium take the gold medal and great britain and the netherlands in second and third place respectively.[69] a member of the belgian team went on to take the individual title as well, with paul anspach taking the gold medal. ivan joseph martin osiier of denmark took the silver medal, and another belgian who was not in the team event, philippe le hardy de beaulieu, won the bronze medal.[70]
the sabre competition was dominated by the competitors from hungary, with their team taking the gold medal over austria and the netherlands.[71] the individual competition saw a shut out by hungarian athletes with jenő fuchs winning the overall competition, béla békessy in second and ervin mészáros in third.[72]
thirteen countries signalled their intention to enter football teams for the 1912 olympics. a standard cup tie system was implemented, with the final deciding the gold and silver medallists and a third/fourth position playoff deciding the bronze medal winner. only fifa affiliated teams were allowed to take part, with the public draw for the tournament taking place on 18 june 1911.[73] the tournament itself started on 29 july. in the first round finland defeated italy 3–2,[74] austria beat germany 5–1 and the netherlands emerged victorious over sweden 4–3.[75][76] the team from great britain, who had won the gold medal at the 1908 summer games, were given a bye to the second round, where they faced hungary and won 7–0.[77] finland also won their match, defeating russia 2–1.[78] denmark matched the british scoreline, winning 7–0 against norway,[79] and the netherlands won against austria 3–1.[80]
the semi final matches pitted great britain against finland, where they won 4–0,[81] and denmark against the netherlands, ending in a 4–1 victory for denmark.[82] the netherlands won the third/fourth place playoff by the biggest scoreline of the tournament, beating finland 9–0.[83] later on the same day the final was played in the olympic stadium, where great britain retained its gold medal against denmark in front of 25,000 spectators. goals from harold walden, arthur berry and two from gordon hoare helped britain to win by a margin of 4–2.[84]
the gymnastic competition at the 1912 games featured a single individual competition and three team events in addition to a variety of displays by the various teams. the swedish team naturally won the gymnastics event of the swedish system, referred to in the programme as "team competition i", with fellow scandinavian teams denmark and norway taking the second and third positions. the all around team competition came second, with italy taking the gold.[85] in addition, one of the italian team members, alberto braglia, won the individual gold for the same event. louis ségura of the french team won the individual silver, while another member of the italian team, adolfo tunesi, won the individual bronze.[65] the all around team competition saw hungary take the silver medal and the team from great britain in third place.[85] the final team competition allowed for a free choice of movements and apparatus.[86] this was another all scandinavian affair, with the norwegian team emerging victorious, finland in second and denmark in the bronze medal position.[65]
modern pentathlon was competed for at the 1912 games, marking its first appearance in the olympics.[87] it was for these games that the five events of shooting, swimming, equestrian, fencing and cross country running were decided to make up the pentathlon.[88] the competition was spread out across five days from 7 through to 12 july, ending with the cross country race.[89]
for the shooting element, each competitor was allowed to bring their own pistol. the american competitor george s. patton (later better known as the second world war us army general) used a colt revolver, while the danish competitors preferred the danish army service pistol, the germans and norwegians used the luger p08 pistol and the swedes used a target practice pistol by smith & wesson.[90] the shooting part of the competition was won by gösta åsbrink, with georg de laval and gösta lilliehöök in second and third place respectively, all three representing sweden.[91]
the swimming event was three lengths, each of 100 metres (330 ft), with the athletes split into eight heats and times going forward to calculate positions. ralph clilverd of great britain won this event, with edmond bernhardt of austria in second and de laval in third.[92] the fencing competition saw each competitor face off against each other. several opponents were noted for their particular skill in the event with åke grönhagen of sweden coming first with 24 wins, jean de mas latrie of france second with 23, sidney stranne of sweden in third with 21 and patton of the united states close behind with 20.[93] thirteen of the competitors cleared the equestrian course without any penalties, with grönhagen winning the event, bror mannström of sweden in second and de laval third.[93]
the cross country run was over 4,000 metres and started in the olympic stadium itself. the event was run as a time trial with competitors leaving one minute apart.[94] as this was the final event, the winning competitors were announced after the race, with lilliehöök winning the gold medal, åsbrink taking silver and de laval, bronze. the highest placed non-swedish competitor was patton, who finished fifth.[95]
the rowing events at the 1912 olympics did not prove popular with the public. this was put down to the "fatigue" of the public due to the volume of sporting events.[96] the eight competition was split into heats, with two teams in each heat.[97] the two british crews were lucky not to be drawn against each other, with the team from leander club facing new college, oxford in the final. leander won by a length with a time of 6:15.[98] the coxed four followed a similar format to the eights, with the german team from ludwigshafener ruderverein defeating britain's thames rowing club in the final.[99]
the competition for the coxed four, inriggers was much smaller, with only four nations competing. the danish team defeated sweden in the final.[100] the single sculls heats proved controversial with the first round race between mart kuusik and alfred heinrich being re-run after a protest by heinrich. in addition, cecil mcvilly was disqualified in the first round after colliding with the boat of martin stahnke.[101] wally kinnear of great britain defeated polydore veirman of belgium in the final,[102] with kinnear winning the matchup easily.[96]
the yachts for the sailing competition assembled at nynäshamn on 19 july, along with the other vessels that were to take part in an olympic regatta.[103] the racing itself started the following day with the 12 metre class.[104] there were only three nations and yachts competing in this event, the hosts sweden, as well as norway and finland.[103] norway won the gold medal, sweden the silver and finland came in last place, winning bronze.[105] the 10 metre class had the same number of countries entering it, although this time sweden entered two yachts and russia competed instead of norway.[103] the swedish yacht kitty was the winning vessel, with the finnish boat in second and the russians coming third.[105]
a slightly improved field was featured in the 8 metre class, with four countries entering two yachts each.[103] the medals were awarded to exactly the same nations as the 12 metre class, another all scandinavian affair.[105] the 6 metre class saw the most diverse field of any of the sailing events at the 1912 olympics: six countries entered a total of nine yachts. france and denmark competed in their only sailing event, along with sweden, sending two yachts each.[103] those three nations were the successful in the event, with the french yacht mac miche taking the gold, the danish nurdug ii taking silver and the swedish kerstin placing third.[106]
there were eighteen shooting events at the 1912 olympics, of which eight were team events. the competition was split predominantly into three sections: military rifle shooting,[107] shooting with miniature rifles, pistols and revolvers,[108] and clay bird and running deer shooting.[109] the swedish and american competitors were the most successful at the competition, with seven gold medals each, although sweden won a total of seventeen medals while the united states team won fourteen.[110]  64-year-old oscar swahn, part of the swedish single shot running deer team, is still the oldest gold medal winner in olympic history.[111]
in swimming, hawaiian duke kahanamoku won the 100 metre freestyle for the united states,[112] who also saw harry hebner win gold in the 100 metre backstroke.[113] the canadian team also took two gold medals, both by george hodgson in the 400 and 1,500 metre events.[114][115] the german swimming team won all three medals in the 200 metre breaststroke, with the gold going to walter bathe,[116] who won a further gold in the 400 metre breaststroke.[117] the australasian team was victorious in the men's relay, with the united states finishing in the silver medal position and great britain placing third.[118]
the 1912 games saw the implementation of swimming events for women, with the 100 metre freestyle and 400 metre team relay taking place. fanny durack won the individual contest, breaking the world record for the distance in the fourth heat. her fellow australian mina wylie won the silver medal, and jennie fletcher of great britain came third to take the bronze medal.[119] the british team had further success in the women's relay, winning the team relay with the german team in second place and the austrian team in third.[119] because only four countries entered the relay there were no heats; only a final was held. the united states did not field a women's team. four years later in brussels the american women would compete for the first time and sweep 7 out of 7 available medals. in 1924, the united states would enter the largest women's team of any nation.[120][121] new olympic records were set in all swimming events at the 1912 games.[122]
tennis on covered courts was agreed initially for the 1912 games, with competitions run for gentlemen's singles and doubles, ladies' singles, and mixed doubles.[123] the outdoor tournament was confirmed once the östermalm athletic grounds were completed in late 1911, with the plans modified to have both indoor and outdoor tournaments.[124]
six countries sent players for the covered court competitions, with representatives from sweden, great britain, denmark, france, australasia, and bohemia appearing. included in this lineup was australasia's only competitor, anthony wilding from new zealand, who was also the reigning wimbledon gentlemen's champion.[125] the indoor knockout competition started on 5 may, and continued as expected until the semi-final round where wilding was beaten by britain's charles p. dixon.[126] the british player met frenchman andré gobert in the final, but gobert was victorious over the englishman in straight sets. wilding took the bronze medal in a playoff against another british player, arthur lowe.[127]
the outdoors tennis competition saw 70 players enter from 12 nations. however, great britain did not enter any competitors as the dates of the outdoor competition clashed with the 1912 wimbledon championships, despite attempts by the british authorities to convince the olympic organizing committee to change the dates. other noted tennis players refused to compete at the olympics and instead attended wimbledon.[128] the gold and silver medals in the gentlemen's singles ended up being decided between two south africans, with charles winslow and harold kitson playing each other. winslow won the match and the gold medal, 7–5, 4–6, 10–8, 8–6.[129] the duo also competed as a pair in the gentlemen's doubles and took the gold medal, beating the austrians felix pipes and arthur zborzil.[130] marguerite broquedis of france defeated dorothea koring of germany in the ladies' singles for the gold medal.[131] in the mixed doubles koring teamed up with heinrich schomburgk to win the gold, the duo defeating sigrid fick and gunnar setterwall of sweden in the final.[132]
the tug of war competition was scheduled to take place between 7 and 12 july, with two matches taking place each day. however, out of the five countries which elected to enter the competition, only two actually appeared. great britain arrived for its match against bohemia, but the opposition team was nowhere to be found. britain was duly declared the winner. the same thing happened once more for the second match, with the swedish team, made up of policemen from stockholm, arriving to find that the austrian team had not arrived. sweden was announced as the winners of the match in the austrians' absence.[133]
on the second day of the competition, great britain took on sweden, the only occasion where both teams actually turned up for the bout. the british team were made up of the winners of the gold medal in the same event at the 1908 games, with the exception of john sewell and mathias hynes. as the british team also consisted of policemen, the bout ended up effectively being between the city of london police and the stockholm police, with the swedish team winning 2–0.[133] due to the non-appearance of the team from luxembourg, that one match ended up being the entire tug of war event at the 1912 olympics. sweden was awarded the gold medal and great britain the silver.[134]
the water polo tournament was set up on a modified elimination system as there were six teams entered. the first round saw the british team defeating the belgian team, sweden defeating the french team and austria defeating hungary. lots were drawn to determine which match would take place in the second round as there were three teams left in the competition. great britain were drawn to face sweden, who they defeated. austria automatically qualified for the final against the winner of the britain-sweden matchup.[135] great britain won the gold medal in the event, defeating austria 8–0.[136] playoff matches were then played between each pair of defeated teams in order to decide the second and third places.[137] sweden and belgium played off after a further three matches to decide the silver and bronze medal positions, with sweden emerging victorious 4–2.[138]
the nations at the 1912 games entered a total of 267 wrestlers, although the actual competitors who appeared in sweden were fewer, with 171 actually turning up to compete.[139] greco-roman wrestling was the only style of wrestling competed for at the games.[140] the bouts took place in the open air in an area of the olympic stadium, with the wrestlers split according to weight into five divisions: featherweight, lightweight, middleweight a (later referred to as middleweight), middleweight b (later referred to as light heavyweight) and heavyweight.[139]
the skills of the competitors from finland were noted in the featherweight competition, with kaarlo koskelo taking the gold medal, while german georg gerstäcker took silver and a further medal went to finland with otto lasanen taking bronze.[141] the lightweight class drew the most attention from the public, with emil väre winning gold after beating all of his opponents by pin rather than by points. swedish wrestlers gustaf malmström and edvin mattiasson took the silver and bronze medals respectively.[141] claes johanson won sweden's only gold medal in the light heavyweight competition, with his fellow finalist from russia, martin klein, retiring before fighting johanson in the final. this was due to the semi final match between klein and alfred asikainen of finland lasting 11 hours and forty minutes,[140] although they took breaks for refreshments every half-hour. klein was awarded the silver medal and asikainen the bronze.[142]
the light heavyweight competition saw another marathon length match, with the bout between anders ahlgren of sweden and ivar böhling of finland for the gold medal lasting more than nine hours. the match was then declared a draw with both athletes being awarded the silver medal as neither won the match.[142] the bronze medal went to hungary's béla varga, who was defeated by ahlgren in the semi final match.[143] yrjö saarela of finland was victorious in the heavyweight competition after having placed second in the light heavyweight event at the 1908 games. johan olin took another medal for finland with the silver and søren marinus jensen repeated his bronze medal at the 1908 olympics with another for denmark.[143]
the 1912 summer olympics saw the introduction of art competitions at the summer olympics.[40] events were implemented for literature, sculpture, painting, architecture and music.[144][145] walter winans won the gold medal for his sculpture, an american trotter,[145] which added to his previous gold medal for the running deer (double shot) competition at the 1908 olympics and the silver medal in the running deer competition in 1912.[146]
baron pierre de coubertin, president of the ioc and founder of the modern olympic movement,[147] won the gold medal for literature.[148] he actually entered the competition under the pseudonyms of georges hohrod and martin eschbach from germany.[145] with the exception of the sculpture competition, only gold medals were issued. italian riccardo barthelemy won the medal for music with his olympic triumphal march, and fellow countryman giovanni pellegrini won the gold for painting. the swiss architects eugène-edouard monod and alphonse laverrière shared the gold for their stadium design.[145] the sole silver medal, for sculpture, went to frenchman georges dubois for his model of the entrance to a modern stadium.[144]
in the evening of 7 july, demonstrations took place in the olympic stadium of sports from the swedish island of gotland. these began at 7:30pm with a demonstration of pärk, a type of tennis with seven players a side. at the same time, at the other end of the stadium, a type of icelandic wrestling called glima was demonstrated.[149] once those displays had concluded, further demonstrations were made of the swedish sport varpa, similar to quoits, and stångstörtning, a version of the caber toss.[150]
baseball was also demonstrated at the games, having only appeared recently in sweden two years before. the vesterås baseball club were invited to make a demonstration on one evening during the games. the american delegation at the games had brought along baseball uniforms, but the american olympic committee refused to risk injury to its athletes by having the baseball demonstration take place whilst there were any events still to take place involving those athletes. therefore, the game was played on 17 july at the östermalm athletic grounds, as the olympic stadium was being used for the equestrian competition.[151] the united states lent some players to the swedish team to make up numbers, but still ended up defeating the hosts 13–3.[152]
twenty-eight nations competed at the 1912 games. egypt participated for the first time,[153] as did iceland,[154] portugal,[155] and serbia.[156] japan also made their olympic debut, marking the first appearance of an asian country at an olympic games.[157] chile made its first appearance as a national team, with fourteen athletes attending the games, although it had previously entered one individual at the 1896 games.[158] this was also the first time that athletes from armenia had competed in the olympics, as part of the team from turkey (the officially recognised name for the ottoman empire).[159] serbia's appearance was the only time it attended an olympic games as an independent nation until the 2008 summer olympics, almost one hundred years later.[156]
this was the last olympics that allowed "private entries", i.e. individual athletes that were not part of a country's officially selected team. arnold jackson was one such private entry;[160] he won the 1500 metres by 0.1 seconds, ahead of an american trio who had been strong favourites, in what was acclaimed at the time to be "the greatest race ever run".[161]
these are the top 10 nations that won medals at the 1912 games.[162] the medals themselves included solid gold medals, the last time these were given out.[163]

the 1916 summer olympics (german: olympische sommerspiele 1916), officially known as the games of the vi olympiad, were scheduled to be held in berlin, german empire, but were eventually cancelled due to the outbreak of world war i. berlin was selected as the host city during the 14th ioc session in stockholm on 4 july 1912,[1] defeating bids from alexandria, amsterdam, brussels, budapest and cleveland.[2] after the 1916 games were cancelled, berlin would eventually host the 1936 summer olympics, twenty years later.
work on the stadium, the deutsches stadion ("german stadium"), began in 1912 at what was the grunewald race course. it was planned to seat more than 18,000 spectators.[3] on 8 june 1913, the stadium was dedicated with the release of 10,000 pigeons. 60,000 people were in attendance.[4]
at the outbreak of world war i in 1914, organization continued as no one expected that the war would continue for several years. eventually, though, the games were cancelled.[5]
a winter sports week with speed skating, figure skating, ice hockey and nordic skiing was planned; the concept of this week eventually gave rise to the first winter olympic games. the central venue was to have been the deutsches stadion.
berlin returned to olympic bidding in 1931, when it beat barcelona, spain, for the right to host the 1936 summer olympics, the last olympics before the outbreak of world war ii.[6]

the 1920 summer olympics (french: les jeux olympiques d'été de 1920; dutch: olympische zomerspelen van de viie olympiade; german: olympische sommerspiele 1920), officially known as the games of the vii olympiad, were an international multi-sport event in 1920 in antwerp, belgium.
in march 1912, during the 13th session of the ioc, belgium's bid to host the 1920 summer olympics was made by baron édouard de laveleye, president of the belgian olympic committee and of the royal belgian football association. no fixed host city was proposed at the time.
the 1916 summer olympics, to be held in berlin, capital of the german empire, were cancelled due to world war i. the aftermath of the war and the paris peace conference, 1919 affected the olympic games not only due to new states being created, but also by sanctions against the nations that lost the war and were blamed for starting it. hungary, germany, austria, bulgaria, and the ottoman empire were banned from competing in the games. germany did not return to olympic competition until 1928 and instead hosted a series of games called deutsche kampfspiele, starting with the winter edition of 1922 (which predated the first winter olympics). the united states won the most gold and overall medals.
the sailing events were held in ostend, belgium, and two in amsterdam, netherlands.
in march 1912, during the 13th session of the ioc, the bid on the behalf of belgium to host the 1920 summer olympics. it was made by baron édouard de laveleye, president of the belgian olympic committee and of the royal belgian football association. no fixed host city was proposed at the time.[2]
the organising committee was created on 9 august 1913. it had four presidents:
among the 22 vice-presidents of the committee were people with a military or industrial background, and further people from sports organizations like paul havenith, president of the football and athletics club k. beerschot v.a.c. and nicolaas jan cupérus, president of the belgian gymnastics federation.[3]
the first action of the committee was to send an official letter to the ioc in paris, confirming antwerp as the city for the belgian olympic bid. on 13 september 1913, pierre de coubertin, president of the ioc, visited the grounds of the future olympic stadion in beerschot.
in 1914, a 109-page brochure was created to promote the idea of antwerp as a host city for the olympics: aurons-nous la viième olympiade à anvers? (will we have the 7th olympiad at antwerp?). it was sent to all ioc members and was used during the 6th olympic congress in paris in 1914, where the candidacies of amsterdam, antwerp, budapest, and rome were discussed. despite a slight preference at the time for budapest, no final choice was made, and the outbreak of world war i soon afterwards prevented any further progress.[4]
in 1915, lyon made a bid for the 1920 games, but after some discussion, they agreed to support antwerp and postpone their bid until 1924 if antwerp was liberated in time to organize the games. the support for belgium by cousin country france, then the leading country of the ioc, also meant that amsterdam, and budapest, in an enemy state, made no chance for the 1920 games against antwerp. new candidacies from american cities did not have that disadvantage and bids were received from cleveland, philadelphia, and atlanta (which would eventually host the 1996 summer olympics), and cuba also planned a bid for havana. but shortly after the armistice in november 1918, the ioc decided to give antwerp the first choice, if they still wanted to host the 1920 games. in march 1919, the belgian olympic committee decided to go ahead with the organization, and on 5 april 1919, in a meeting in lausanne, antwerp was officially declared the host city for the games of the viith olympiad.[5]
an executive committee was established on 17 april 1919, with henri de baillet-latour as chairman and alfred verdyck, the secretary of the belgian union of football clubs, as general secretary. seven commissions were created, to deal with finances, accommodation, press relations, propaganda, schedules, transport, and festivities. finances and scheduling proved to be the two hardest parts to tackle: the program of events only was published in february 1920, six months before the official start of the games.
between 23 and 30 april 1920, an ice hockey tournament marked the early start of the games. held in the "palais de glace" or ice palace in antwerp, it was the first time that ice hockey was an olympic sport.[6]
the first stone of the new olympic stadium at beerschot was laid on 4 july 1919 by jan de vos, mayor of antwerp, and inaugurated less than a year later on 23 may 1920 with a gymnastics demonstration.[7]
the nautical stadium or stade nautique d'antwerp was built at the end of the jan van rijswijcklaan, using the city ramparts there as a spectator's stand. other events, like shooting, boxing, and equestrian sports, were held at pre-existing locations in and around antwerp and as far away as ostend.[8]
156 events[10] in 29 disciplines, comprising 22 sports, were part of the olympic program in 1920. the sailing program was open for a total of 16 sailing classes, but actually only 14 sailing events were contested. the number of events in each discipline is noted in parentheses.
seventeen sports venues were used in the 1920 summer olympics. this marked the first time that the football tournament was spread throughout the country, which has mostly been the case since.[11]
a total of 29 nations participated in the antwerp games, only one more than in 1912, as germany, austria, hungary, bulgaria and ottoman empire were not invited, having lost world war i. from the newly created european states, only estonia took part, and czechoslovakia, succeeding bohemia which had sent athletes prior to world war i as part of the austrian empire. poland was busy with the polish-soviet war and therefore was unable to form an olympic team. soviet russia was also not invited as part of its political embargo by the west.  argentina, the kingdom of serbs, croats and slovenes, brazil, and monaco competed as nations at the olympic games for the first time. new zealand, which had competed as part of a combined team with australia in 1908 and 1912, competed on its own for the first time.
as the local olympic organizing committee went bankrupt during the antwerp 1920 games, no official report of the games was ever produced. the documents of the games were archived at the belgium olympic committee headquarters in brussels.[41]
these are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1920 games.

the 1924 summer olympics (french: les jeux olympiques d'été de 1924), officially known as the games of the viii olympiad, were an international multi-sport event which was celebrated in 1924 in paris, france.
it was the second time paris hosted the games, after 1900. the selection process for the 1924 summer olympics consisted of six bids, and paris was selected ahead of amsterdam, barcelona, los angeles, prague, and rome. the selection was made at the 20th ioc session in lausanne in 1921.[2] the united states won the most gold and overall medals.
the cost of the games of the viii olympiad was estimated to be 10,000,000₣. with total receipts at 5,496,610₣, the olympics resulted in a hefty loss despite crowds that reached 60,000 people at a time.[3]
126 events in 23 disciplines, comprising 17 sports, were part of the olympic program in 1924. the number of events in each discipline is noted in parentheses.
seventeen sports venues were used in the 1924 summer olympics. stade de colombes served as the final venue for the 1938 fifa world cup between italy and hungary.
a total of 44 nations were represented at the 1924 games. germany was still absent, having not been invited by the organizing committee.[25] china (although did not compete), ecuador, haiti, ireland, lithuania, and uruguay attended the olympic games for the first time while the philippines competed for first time in an olympic games as a nation though it first participated in 1900 summer olympic games also in this city. latvia and poland attended the summer olympic games for the first time (having both appeared earlier at the 1924 winter olympics in chamonix).
these are the top ten nations that won 
medals the 1924 games.
the 1924 summer olympics are the last edition of the summer olympics to be held in paris. one hundred years later, the city will host the 2024 summer olympics, marking the third time the city hosts the games. one venue from the 1924 games is slated to be used in 2024. the extensively renovated and downsized main stadium, known since 1928 as stade olympique yves-du-manoir, will host field hockey.
the last surviving competitor of the 1924 summer olympics was croatian swimmer ivo pavelić, who died on 22 february 2011 at the age of 103.

the 1928 summer olympics (dutch: olympische zomerspelen 1928), officially known as the games of the ix olympiad, was an international multi-sport event that was celebrated from 28 july to 12 august 1928 in amsterdam, netherlands. the city of amsterdam had previously bid for the 1920 and 1924 olympic games, but was obliged to give way to war-torn antwerp in belgium for the 1920 games and pierre de coubertin's paris for the 1924 games. the united states won the most gold and overall medals.
the only other candidate city for the 1928 olympics was los angeles, which would eventually be selected to host the olympics four years later. in preparation for the 1932 summer olympics, the united states olympic committee reviewed the costs and revenue of the 1928 games. the committee reported a total cost of us$1.183 million with receipts of us$1.165 million, giving a negligible loss of us$18,000, which was a considerable improvement over the 1924 games.[2]
dutch nobleman frederik van tuyll van serooskerken first proposed amsterdam as host city for the summer olympic games in 1912, even before the netherlands olympic committee was established.
the olympic games were cancelled in 1916 due to world war i. in 1919, the netherlands olympic committee abandoned the proposal of amsterdam in favor of their support for the nomination of antwerp as host city for the 1920 summer olympics. in 1921, paris was selected for the 1924 summer olympics on the condition that the 1928 summer olympics would be organized in amsterdam. this decision, supported by the netherlands olympic committee, was announced by the international olympic committee (ioc) on 2 june 1921.
the ioc's decision was disputed by the americans, but their request to allocate the 1928 summer olympics to los angeles was without success in 1922 and again in 1923.[3] los angeles was eventually selected as host city for the 1932 summer olympics.[4]:p.915
during the 1928 summer olympics, there were 14 sports, 20 disciplines and 109 events in the tournament. in parentheses is the number of events per discipline.[4]:pp.973–985
women's athletics and team gymnastics debuted at these olympics,[10] in spite of criticism. five women's athletics events were added: 100 meters, 800 meters, high jump, discus, and 400 meter hurdles. in protest of the limited number of events, british women athletes, boycotted the games.[11] halina konopacka of poland became the first female olympic track and field champion. reports that the 800 meter run ended with several of the competitors being completely exhausted were widely (and erroneously) circulated. as a result, the ioc decided that women were too frail for long distance running, and women's olympic running events were limited to 200 meters until the 1960s.[12]
tennis disappeared from the program, only to reappear in 1968 as a demonstration sport.
these games also included art competitions in five categories: architecture, painting, sculpture, literature, and poetry. however, the ioc no longer considers these to be official medal events, so the medals awarded are not included in today's olympic medal counts.[13]
fourteen sports venues were used for the 1928 summer olympics. the swim stadium was demolished in 1929 with it being a temporary venue.[4]:p.193 the het kasteel football stadium was renovated in 1998–99. the monnikenhuize stadium was demolished in 1950. the schermzaal sports hall has also been demolished. the olympic stadium was renovated between 1996 and 2000, and is still in use. the old stadion was demolished in 1929 and replaced with housing in the amsterdam area.
a total of 46 nations were represented at the amsterdam games. malta, panama, and rhodesia (now zimbabwe) competed at the olympic games for the first time. germany returned after having been banned in 1920 and 1924.[17]
these are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1928 games.
the official poster for the games was designed by jos rovers, and 10,000 copies were made.
the poster displays a running man in a white shirt, with in the background the olympic stadium and the olympic flag.
the ioc never succeeded in obtaining the copyright of the image. therefore, out of practical considerations, the ioc used a different poster, with the german text olympische spiele, and an athlete partly covered in the dutch national flag, holding a peace leaf in his hand. the poster was made for a german book about the amsterdam olympics.[18]
the last living competitor of the 1928 summer olympics was clara marangoni, a member of the silver-medal winning italian gymnastic team who had been 12 years old during the olympics.
she died 18 january 2018, at the age of 102. she was also the oldest living olympic medalist at the time of her death.[19]

the 1932 summer olympics, officially known as the games of the x olympiad, was an international multi-sport event that was held from july 30 to august 14, 1932, in los angeles, california, united states.
the games were held during the worldwide great depression and some nations were unable to pay for the trip to los angeles; 37 nations competed compared to 46 in the 1928 summer olympics in amsterdam. even u.s. president herbert hoover did not attend the games.[2] the united states won the most gold and overall medals.
the organizing committee did not report the financial details of the games, although contemporary newspapers claimed that the games had made a profit of us$1,000,000.[2]
the selection of the host city for the 1932 summer olympics was made at the 23rd ioc session in rome, italy, in 1923.[3] remarkably, the selection process consisted of a single bid, from los angeles, and as there were no bids from any other city, los angeles was selected by default to host the 1932 games.
117 events in 20 disciplines, comprising 14 sports, were part of the olympic program in 1932. in one of two equestrian jumping events (team competitions) no medals were awarded. the number of events in each discipline is noted in parentheses.
the art competitions at the 1932 summer olympics awarded medals for works inspired by sport-related themes in five categories: architecture, literature, music, painting, and sculpture.
fifteen sports venues were used for the 1932 summer olympics. in order to control costs in the wake of the great depression, existing venues were used. they included two golf courses, two city parks, three public highways, and a city road. the swimming stadium was the only new venue constructed for these games. the rose bowl, constructed in 1921, was made into a temporary velodrome for track cycling events under the auspices of the union cycliste internationale (uci).[11][11][12] the los angeles memorial coliseum, constructed in 1923, was used as the olympic stadium.[13][14] the olympic auditorium was constructed in 1924 in preparation for los angeles being awarded the games; it was modified to meet the specifications of the boxing, weightlifting, and wrestling federations.[15] long beach marine stadium was created in 1925 when alamitos bay was dredged, then further dredged seven years later in time for the 1932 games.[16] elysian park, the oldest city park in los angeles, was founded in 1886, and has been part of the los angeles police department (lapd) training academy since 1925.[17][18] the riviera country club opened in 1926 as the los angeles athletic club golf course and was renamed riviera by the time of the 1932 games.[19] the swimming stadium, constructed adjacent to the coliseum in 1932, was intended to be a temporary structure.[20] riverside drive, los angeles avenue, vineyard avenue, and the pacific coast highway were common driving routes in california at the time of the 1932 games.[21][22]
the coliseum was the first home for the dodgers major league baseball (mlb) team when it moved from brooklyn, new york in the 1958 season.[23] the following year, it hosted the mlb all-star game and the world series.[24][25] once dodger stadium was completed in 1962, the dodgers moved there where they have been since.[26] the los angeles rams national football league (nfl) team used the coliseum as its host stadium from 1946 to 1980 when it moved to anaheim, located southeast of los angeles.[27][28] it also hosted what would become known as super bowl i in 1967.[29] even the american football league's chargers used the coliseum as a venue in 1960 until their move to san diego the following year.[30]  the coliseum continues to host usc trojans football games to this day, and also hosted ucla bruins football for a number of years.  the rams return to the coliseum in 2016.
the track constructed in the rose bowl was given to the tournament of roses association upon completion of the 1932 games.[11] the bowl was expanded between 1932 and the 1984 summer olympics three times, increasing its capacity from 83,000 in 1931 to 104,594 in 1972.[31] it hosted super bowl xi in 1977, where the oakland raiders defeated the minnesota vikings 32–14.[31]  it is the current home of ucla bruins football and the rose bowl game, and was the home of the l.a. galaxy soccer team for a number of years.
elysian park's shooting range was left intact for the lapd to use.[11] sunset fields golf club was renamed brentwood country club in 1941 and is still in use as of 2010.[32] all of the road courses were returned to public usage after the olympics.[21][22] the olympic auditorium continued to be of use for boxing and roller derby events[33] until june 2005 when it was bought to be used as a megachurch. los angeles harbor continues to be a major sea port in the western united states, employing 919,000 people and generating us$39.1 billion in annual wages and tax revenues as of 2007.[34] the riveria country club continues to host golf events, hosting the 1948 u.s. open and the pga championship in 1983 and 1995.[35][36][37] the swim stadium was renovated in 2003 and continues to be in use as of 2010.[38]
for the 1984 summer olympics, the coliseum and the rose bowl were used as venues.[39]
a total of 37 nations were represented at the 1932 games. colombia made its first appearance at the olympic games, and the republic of china competed for the first time after its failed appearance at the 1924 games.
these are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1932 games.

the 1936 summer olympics (german: olympische sommerspiele 1936), officially known as the games of the xi olympiad, was an international multi-sport event held in 1936 in berlin, nazi germany. berlin won the bid to host the games over barcelona, spain, on 26 april 1931, at the 29th ioc session in barcelona.  it marked the second and final time the international olympic committee gathered to vote in a city that was bidding to host those games.
to outdo the los angeles games of 1932, reich chancellor adolf hitler had a new 100,000-seat track and field stadium built, as well as six gymnasiums and many other smaller arenas. the games were the first to be televised, and radio broadcasts reached 41 countries.[2] filmmaker leni riefenstahl was commissioned by the german olympic committee to film the games for $7 million.[2] her film, titled olympia, pioneered many of the techniques now common in the filming of sports.
hitler saw the games as an opportunity to promote his government and ideals of racial supremacy and antisemitism, and the official nazi party paper, the völkischer beobachter, wrote in the strongest terms that jews should not be allowed to participate in the games.[3][4] german jewish athletes were barred or prevented from taking part by a variety of methods,[5] although some women swimmers from the jewish sports club, hakoah vienna, did take part. jewish athletes from other countries seem to have been side-lined in order not to offend the nazi regime.[6]
total ticket revenues were 7.5 million reichsmark, generating a profit of over one million ℛℳ. the official budget did not include outlays by the city of berlin (which issued an itemized report detailing its costs of 16.5 million ℛℳ) or outlays of the german national government (which did not make its costs public, but is estimated to have spent us$30 million).[7]
jesse owens won four gold medals in the sprint and long jump events and became the most successful athlete to compete in berlin while germany was the most successful country overall with 89 medals total, with the united states coming in second with 56 medals. these were the final olympics under the presidency of henri de baillet-latour and the final olympic games for 12 years due to the disruption of the second world war. the next olympic games were held in 1948 (the winter in switzerland and then the summer in london).
at the 28th ioc session, held in 1930, in berlin, 14 cities announced their intention to bid to host the 1936 summer olympic games.
the bidding for these olympic games was the first to be contested by ioc members casting votes for their own favorite host cities.[8]
the vote occurred in 1931, at the 29th ioc session held in barcelona that year. the vote was held days after the declaration of the second spanish republic and during the final years of the weimar republic. this was two years before adolf hitler and the nazi party rose to power in germany, in 1933.
by the time of the 1931 ioc session, only barcelona and berlin were left in contention for the delegate vote. rome withdrew on the eve of the vote. how other candidates withdrew is unclear, as is the seriousness of intent behind all of the listed candidate cities. the other cities who announced an intention to hold the games, but which withdrew from the race, were alexandria, budapest, buenos aires, cologne, dublin, frankfurt, helsinki, lausanne, montevideo, nuremberg, rio de janeiro, and rome. helsinki, rome, barcelona and rio de janeiro would go on to host the olympic games in 1952, 1960, 1992 and 2016, respectively.[9]
the selection procedure marked the second and final time that the international olympic committee would gather to vote in a city which was bidding to host those games. the only other time this occurred was at the inaugural ioc session in paris, france, on 24 april 1894. then, athens and paris were chosen to host the 1896 and 1900 games, respectively.
the city of barcelona held a multi-sport festival at the same time as the 1931 ioc session. this included a football match between spain and the irish free state, which was watched by 70,000 spectators. the political uncertainty around the declaration of the second spanish republic, which had happened days before the ioc session, was likely to have been a greater factor in the decision taken by delegates regarding the host city for 1936. berlin prevailed.
after the nazis took control of germany, and began instituting antisemitic policies, the ioc held private discussions among its delegates about changing the decision to hold the games in berlin. however, hitler's regime gave assurances that jewish athletes would be allowed to compete on a german olympic team.[10]
hans von tschammer und osten, as reichssportführer, i.e. head of the deutscher reichsbund für leibesübungen (drl), the reich sports office, played a major role in the structure and organisation of the olympics. he promoted the idea that the use of sports would harden the german spirit and instill unity among german youth. at the same time he also believed that sports was a "way to weed out the weak, jewish, and other undesirables".[11]
von tschammer trusted the details of the organisation of the games to theodor lewald and carl diem, the former president and secretary of the deutscher reichsausschuss für leibesübungen, the forerunner of the reich sports office. among diem's ideas for the berlin games was the introduction of the olympic torch relay between greece and the host nation.
the 1936 summer olympics torch relay was the first of its kind,[12] following on from the reintroduction of the olympic flame at the 1928 games. it pioneered the modern convention of moving the flame via a relay system from greece to the olympic venue. leni riefenstahl filmed the relay for the 1938 film olympia.
the sportive, knightly battle awakens the best human characteristics. it doesn't separate, but unites the combatants in understanding and respect. it also helps to connect the countries in the spirit of peace. that's why the olympic flame should never die.the games were the first to have live television coverage. the german post office, using equipment from telefunken, broadcast over 70 hours of coverage to special viewing rooms throughout berlin and potsdam and a few private tv sets, transmitting from the paul nipkow tv station. they used three different types of tv cameras, so blackouts would occur when changing from one type to another.[14]
the 1936 olympic village is located at elstal in wustermark (at 52°32′10.78″n 13°0′33.20″e﻿ / ﻿52.5363278°n 13.0092222°e﻿ / 52.5363278; 13.0092222), on the western edge of berlin. the site, which is 30 kilometres (19 mi) from the centre of the city, consisted of one and two-floor dormitories, a large dining hall, dining hall of the nations, a swimming facility, gymnasium, track, and other training facilities. its layout was designed and construction overseen by appointed village commander hauptmann wolfgang fürstner beginning in 1934.[15] less than two months before the start of the olympic games, fürstner was abruptly demoted to vice-commander, and replaced by oberstleutnant werner von gilsa, commander of the berlin guard-regiment. the official reason for the replacement was that fürstner had not acted "with the necessary energy" to prevent damage to the site as 370,000 visitors passed through it between 1 may and 15 june. however, this was just a cover story to explain the sudden demotion of the half-jewish officer.[16] the 1935 nuremberg laws, passed during the period fürstner was overseeing the olympic village, had classified him as a jew, and as such, the career officer was to be expelled from the wehrmacht.[17] two days after the conclusion of the berlin olympics, vice-commander fürstner had been removed from active wehrmacht duty,[18] and committed suicide because he realised he had no future under the nazis.[16]
after the completion of the olympic games, the village was repurposed for the wehrmacht into the olympic döberitz hospital (german: olympia-lazarett döberitz), and army infantry school (german: heeres-infanterieschule), and was used as such through the second world war. in 1945 it was taken over by the soviet union and became a military camp of the union occupation forces. late 20th century efforts were made to restore parts of the former village, but little progress was made.[19][deprecated source] more recently, the vast majority of the land of the olympic village has been managed by the dkb foundation, with more success; efforts are being made to restore the site into a living museum. the dormitory building used by jesse owens, weissen house, has been fully restored, with the gymnasium and swimming hall partially restored. seasonally, tours are given daily to small groups and students.[20]
the site remains relatively unknown even in germany, but some tournaments are held at the site in an effort to boost knowledge of the venues.[21] an effort aimed at 2018 completion is underway to make the village a mixed residential and historical property.[22]
displaying nazi symbols and swastika
spectators giving the nazi salute during one of the medal ceremonies as the nazi flag flies above
the olympic fire in berlin
the olympic village
us track team house at the 1936 berlin olympic village
jesse owens' room in the 1936 olympic village in berlin as seen today.
twenty-two venues were used for the 1936 summer olympics. many were located in the reich sportsfeld complex.
sailing was held in the bay of kiel, which would serve as the sailing venue for the 1972 summer olympics held in munich.[23] the olympic stadium would later be part of two fifa world cups and then host an iaaf world championships in athletics along with undergoing a renovation in the early 2000s to give new life to the stadium. avus motor road (avus) was started in 1907, but was not completed until 1921 due to world war i.[24] the track was rebuilt for the 1936 games.[24] avus continued being used after world war ii though mainly in formula 2 racing.[24] the german grand prix was last held at the track in 1959.[24] dismantling of the track first took place in 1968 to make way for a traffic crossing for touring cars that raced there until 1998.[24]
bsv 92 field was first constructed in 1910 for use in football, handball, athletics, and tennis.[25] the reich sports field, which consisted of the olympic stadium, the dietrich ecekrt open-air theatre, the olympic swimming stadium, mayfield, the hockey stadiums, the tennis courts, and the haus des deutschen sports, was planned for the aborted 1916 summer olympics, but was not completed until 1934.[26] mayfield was the last venue completed prior to the 1936 games in april 1936.[26] deutschland hall was opened in 1935.[27] mommenstadion opened in 1930.[28] basketball was held outdoors at the request of the international basketball federation (fiba).[29][30] the tennis courts were used, which turned to mud during heavy rain at the final.[29] the k-1 1000 m canoeing final was also affected by heavy rain at grünau that included thunder and lightning.[31] during world war ii, deutschlandhalle suffered heavy aerial bombing damage.[27] after the second world war, the hall was reconstructed and expansion has continued as of 2010[update].[27] the deutschlandhalle in berlin, where the boxing, weightlifting, and wrestling events took place, was used as venue, but was increasingly closed for repairs, last in 2009 when it was close for repairs, it was demolished in december 2011. the mommsenstadion was renovated in 1987 and was still in use in 2010.[28]
the olympic stadium was used as an underground bunker in world war ii as the war went against nazi germany's favor.[32] the british reopened the stadium in 1946 and parts of the stadium were rebuilt by the late 1950s.[33] as a host venue for the 1974 fifa world cup, the stadium had its roof partially covered on the north and south stands.[34] british occupation of the stadium ended in 1994.[35] restoration was approved in 1998 with a contractor being found to do the work in 2000.[36] this restoration ran from 2000 to 2004.[37] the modernized stadium reopened in 2004,[38] with a capacity of 74,228 people. the seating has been changed greatly, especially the sections that were reserved for german and international political leaders. the stadium now plays host to hertha bsc (1963–present), and is expected to remain the home of the team for years to come. for the 2006 fifa world cup, the venue was where the final took place between italy and france.[39] three years later, the venue hosted the world athletics championships.[40]
the opening ceremony was held at the berlin olympic stadium on 1 august 1936. a flyover by the german airship hindenburg flying the olympic flag behind it was featured early in the opening ceremonies.[56] after the arrival of hitler and his entourage, the parade of nations proceeded, each nation with its own unique costume. as the birthplace of the olympics, greece entered the stadium first. the host nation, germany, entered last. some nations' athletes purposefully gave the nazi salute as they passed hitler. others gave the olympic salute (a similar one, given with the same arm), or a different gesture entirely, such as hats-over-hearts, as the united states and china did. all nations lowered their flags[dubious  – discuss] as they passed the führer, save the united states. (the united states doing this was explained later as an army regulation.[56]) writer thomas wolfe, who was there, described the opening as an "almost religious event, the crowd screaming, swaying in unison and begging for hitler. there was something scary about it; his cult of personality."[57]
after a speech by the president of the german olympic committee, the games were officially declared open by adolf hitler who quoted (in german): "i proclaim open the olympic games of berlin, celebrating the eleventh olympiad of the modern era."[56] hitler opened the games from his own box, on top of others. writer david wallechinsky has commented on the event, saying, "this was his event, he wanted to be glorified."[57]
although the olympic flame was first introduced in the 1928 summer olympics in amsterdam, this was the first instance of the torch relay. the nazis invented the concept of the torch run from ancient olympia to the host city. thus as swimmer iris cummings critchell later related, "once the athletes were all in place, the torch bearer ran in through the tunnel to go around the stadium". a young man chosen for this task ran up the steps all the way up to the top of the stadium there to light a cauldron which would start this eternal flame that would burn through the duration of the games.[57][58]
but in spite of all the pomp and ceremony, and the glorification of hitler, all did not go according to plan, and there was a rather humorous aspect in the opening ceremony. u.s. distance runner louis zamperini, one of the athletes present, related it on camera:[57]
they released 25,000 pigeons, the sky was clouded with pigeons, the pigeons circles overhead, and then they shot a cannon, and they scared the poop out of the pigeons, and we had straw hats, flat straw hats, and you could heard the pitter-patter on our straw hats, but we felt sorry for the women, for they got it in their hair, but i mean there were a mass of droppings, and i say it was so funny...
129 events in 25 disciplines, comprising 19 sports, were part of the olympic program in 1936. the number of events in each discipline is noted in parentheses.
basketball and handball made their debut at the olympics, both as outdoor sports. handball did not appear again on the program until the next german summer olympic games in munich in 1972. demonstration sports were art, baseball, gliding and wushu.
the ten nations that won most medals at the 1936 games.
  *   host nation (germany)germany had a prosperous year in the equestrian events, winning individual and team gold in all three disciplines, as well as individual silver in dressage. in the cycling match sprint finals, the german toni merkens fouled arie van vliet of the netherlands. instead of being disqualified, he was fined 100 ℛℳ and kept his gold. german gymnasts konrad frey and alfred schwarzmann both won three gold medals.
american jesse owens won four gold medals in the sprint and long jump events. his german competitor luz long offered owens advice after he almost failed to qualify in the long jump and was posthumously awarded the pierre de coubertin medal for sportsmanship. mack robinson, brother to jackie robinson, won the 200-meter sprint silver medal behind owens by 0.4 seconds. although he did not win a medal, future american war hero louis zamperini, lagging behind in the 5,000-meter final, made up ground by clocking a 56-second final lap. this effort caught the attention of adolf hitler who personally commended zamperini on his speed. in one of the most dramatic 800-meter races in history, american john woodruff won gold after slowing to jogging speed in the middle of the final in order to free himself from being boxed in.[59] glenn edgar morris, a farm boy from colorado, won gold in the decathlon. rower jack beresford won his fifth olympic medal in the sport, and his third gold medal. the u.s. eight-man rowing team from the university of washington won the gold medal, coming from behind to defeat the germans and italians with hitler in attendance.
jack lovelock of new zealand won the 1500 m gold medal, coming through a strong field to win in world record time of 3:47.8.
in the marathon, the ethnic koreans sohn kee-chung and nam sung-yong won one gold and one bronze medal; as korea was annexed by japan at the time, they were running for japan.
india won the gold medal in the field hockey event once again (they won the gold in all olympics from 1928 to 1956), defeating germany 8–1 in the final. however, indians were considered indo-aryans by the germans and there was no controversy regarding their victory. rie mastenbroek of the netherlands won three gold medals and a silver in swimming. estonia's kristjan palusalu won gold medals in both men's heavyweight wrestling styles, marking the last time estonia competed as an independent nation in the olympics until 1992.
after winning the middleweight class, the egyptian weightlifter khadr el touni continued to compete for another 45 minutes, finally exceeding the total of the german silver medalist by 35 kg. the 20-year-old el touni lifted a total of 387.5 kg crushing two german world champions, el touni broke the then olympic and world records, while the german lifted 352.5 kg. furthermore, el touni had lifted 15 kg more than the light-heavyweight gold medalist, a feat only el touni has accomplished. el touni's new world records stood for 13 years. fascinated by el touni's performance, adolf hitler rushed down to greet this human miracle. prior to the competition, hitler was said to have been sure that rudolf ismayr and adolf wagner would embarrass all other opponents. hitler was so impressed by el touni's domination in the middleweight class that he ordered a street named after him in berlin's olympic village.[60] the egyptian held the no. 1 position on the iwf list of history's 50 greatest weightlifters for 60 years, until the 1996 games in atlanta where turkey's naim süleymanoğlu surpassed him to top the list.
italy's football team continued their dominance under head coach vittorio pozzo, winning the gold medal in these olympics between their two consecutive world cup victories (1934 and 1938). much like the successes of german athletes, this triumph was claimed by supporters of benito mussolini's regime as a vindication of the superiority of the fascist system. austria won the silver; a controversial win after hitler called for a rematch of the quarterfinals match to discount peru's 4–2 win over austria. the peruvian national olympic team refused to play the match again and withdrew from the games. in the quarter-finals of the football tournament, peru beat austria 4–2 in extra-time. peru rallied from a two-goal deficit in the final 15 minutes of normal time. during extra-time, peruvian fans allegedly ran onto the field and attacked an austrian player. in the chaos, peru scored twice and won, 4–2. however, austria protested and the international olympic committee ordered a replay without any spectators. the peruvian government refused and their entire olympic squad left in protest as did colombia.[61]
a remarkable story from the track and field competition was the gold medal won by the us women's 4 × 100 m relay team. the german team were the heavy favourites, but dropped the baton at one hand-off. of notable interest on the us team was betty robinson.[62] she was the first woman ever awarded an olympic gold medal for track and field, winning the women's 100 m event at the 1928 summer olympics in amsterdam.[62] in 1931, robinson was involved in a plane crash, and was severely injured. her body was discovered in the wreckage and it was wrongly thought that she was dead. she was placed in the trunk of a car and taken to an undertaker, where it was discovered that she was not dead, but in a coma. she awoke from the coma seven months later, although it was another six months before she could get out of a wheelchair, and two years before she could walk normally again.[63] due to the length of her recovery, she had to miss participating in the 1932 summer olympics in los angeles, in her home country.
a total of 49 nations attended the berlin olympics, up from 37 in 1932. five nations made their first official olympic appearance at these games: afghanistan, bermuda, bolivia, costa rica and liechtenstein.
nations participating for the first time shown in blue.
number of attending athletes from respective participating countries.
reich chancellor adolf hitler saw the games as an opportunity to promote his government and ideals of racial supremacy. the official nazi party paper, the völkischer beobachter, wrote in the strongest terms that jewish people and black people should not be allowed to participate in the games.[3][4] however, when threatened with a boycott of the games by other nations, he relented and allowed black people and jewish people to participate, and added one token participant to the german team—a german woman, helene mayer, who had a jewish father. at the same time, the party removed signs stating "jews not wanted" and similar slogans from the city's main tourist attractions. in an attempt to "clean up" the host city, the german ministry of the interior authorized the chief of police to arrest all romani (gypsies) and keep them in a "special camp", the berlin-marzahn concentration camp.[64]
united states olympic committee president avery brundage became a main supporter of the games being held in germany, arguing that "politics has no place in sport", despite having initial doubts.[65]
french olympians gave a roman salute at the opening ceremony: known as the salut de joinville per the battalion bataillon de joinville, the olympic salute was part of the olympic traditions since the 1924 games.[66] however, due to the different context this action was mistaken by the crowd for a support to fascism (the olympic salute was discarded after 1946).[67]
although haiti attended only the opening ceremony, an interesting vexillological fact was noticed: its flag and the flag of liechtenstein were coincidentally identical, and this was not discovered until then.[citation needed] the following year, a crown was added to liechtenstein's to distinguish one flag from the other.
american sprinters sam stoller and marty glickman, the only two jews on the u.s. olympic team, were pulled from the 4 × 100 relay team on the day of the competition, leading to speculation that brundage did not want to add to hitler's embarrassment by having two jews win gold medals.[68]
in 1937, hollywood released the film charlie chan at the olympics. the plot concerned members of the berlin police force helping the chinese detective apprehend a group of spies (of unnamed nationality) trying to steal a new aerial guidance system. despite pertaining to the berlin olympics, actual games' footage used by the filmmakers was edited to remove any nazi symbols.[69]
after the olympics, jewish participation in german sports was further limited, and persecution of jews started to become ever more lethal. the olympic games had provided a nine-month period of relative calmness.[70]
the german olympic committee, in accordance with nazi directives, virtually barred germans who were jewish or roma or had such an ancestry from participating in the games (helene mayer, who had one jewish parent, was the only german jew to compete at the berlin games). this decision meant exclusion for many of the country's top athletes such as shotputter and discus thrower lilli henoch, who was a four-time world record holder and 10-time german national champion,[71] and gretel bergmann who was suspended from the german team just days after she set a record of 1.60 meters in the high jump.[72][73]
individual jewish athletes from a number of countries chose to boycott the berlin olympics, including south african sid kiel,[74] and americans milton green and norman cahners. in the united states, the american jewish congress and the jewish labor committee supported a boycott.[75]
prior to and during the games, there was considerable debate outside germany over whether the competition should be allowed or discontinued. berlin had been selected by the ioc as the host city in 1931, but after adolf hitler's rise to power in 1933, observers in many countries began to question the morality of going ahead with an olympic games hosted by the nazi regime. a number of brief campaigns to boycott or relocate the games emerged in the united kingdom, france, sweden, czechoslovakia and the netherlands.[75] exiled german political opponents of hitler's regime also campaigned against the berlin olympics through pro-communist newspapers such as the arbeiter-illustrierte-zeitung.
the protests were ultimately unsuccessful; in 1935 the amateur athletic union of the united states voted to compete in the berlin games and other countries followed suit. forty-nine teams from around the world participated in the 1936 games, the largest number of participating nations of any olympics to that point.[75]
fencer albert wolff qualified for the french olympic team but boycotted the 1936 summer olympics, withdrawing from france's national team on principle because he was a jew.[76] he said: "i cannot participate in anything sponsored by adolf hitler, even for france."[77]
the spanish government led by the newly elected left-wing popular front boycotted the games and organized the people's olympiad as a parallel event in barcelona. some 6,000 athletes from 49 countries registered. however, the people's olympiad was aborted because of the outbreak of the spanish civil war just one day before the event was due to start.[75]
the soviet union had not participated in international sporting events since the 1920 olympics. the soviet government was not invited to the 1920 games, with the russian civil war still raging, and they did not participate in the 1924 olympics and forward on ideological grounds. instead, through the auspices of the red sport international, it had participated in a left-wing workers' alternative, the spartakiad, since 1928. the ussr had intended to attend the people's olympiad in barcelona until it was cancelled; the soviets did attend the spartakiad-sponsored 1937 workers' summer olympiad in antwerp, belgium.[78] the soviet union started competing in the olympics in 1952, when soviet leaders realized that they can use the event to fulfil their political and ideological agenda.
halet çambel and suat fetgeri așani, the first turkish and muslim women[79] athletes to participate in the olympics (fencing), refused an offer by their guide to be formally introduced to adolf hitler, saying they would not shake hands with him due to his approach to jews, as stated by ms. çambel in a milliyet newspaper interview in 2000.[80]
traditionally the us sent one of the largest teams to the olympics, and there was a considerable debate over whether the united states should participate in the 1936 games.[75]
those involved in the debate on whether to boycott the olympics included ernest lee jahncke, judge jeremiah mahoney, and future ioc president avery brundage. some within the united states considered requesting a boycott of the games, as to participate in the festivity might be considered a sign of support for the nazi regime and its antisemitic policies. however, others such as brundage (see below) argued that the olympic games should not reflect political views, but rather should be strictly a contest of the greatest athletes.
avery brundage, then of the united states olympic committee, opposed the boycott, stating that jewish athletes were being treated fairly and that the games should continue. brundage asserted that politics played no role in sports, and that they should never be entwined. brundage also believed that there was a "jewish-communist conspiracy" that existed to keep the united states from competing in the olympic games.[65] somewhat ironically, brundage would be later accused of being a soviet dupe for his controversial stance on the soviet sports system that allowed them to circumvent the amateur rules.[81][82] on the subject of jewish discrimination, he stated, "the very foundation of the modern olympic revival will be undermined if individual countries are allowed to restrict participation by reason of class, creed, or race."[75]
during a fact-finding trip that brundage went on to germany in 1934 to ascertain whether german jews were being treated fairly, brundage found no discrimination when he interviewed jews and his nazi handlers translated for him, and brundage commiserated with his hosts that he belonged to a sports club in chicago that did not allow jews entry, either.[83]
unlike brundage, jeremiah mahoney supported a boycott of the games. mahoney, the president of the amateur athletic union, led newspaper editors and anti-nazi groups to protest against american participation in the berlin olympics. he contested that racial discrimination was a violation of olympic rules and that participation in the games was tantamount to support for the third reich.
most african-american newspapers supported participation in the olympics. the philadelphia tribune and the chicago defender both agreed that black victories would undermine nazi views of aryan supremacy and spark renewed african-american pride. american jewish organizations, meanwhile, largely opposed the olympics. the american jewish congress and the jewish labor committee staged rallies and supported the boycott of german goods to show their disdain for american participation.[65] the jlc organized the world labor athletic carnival, held on 15 and 16 august at new york's randall's island, to protest the holding of the 1936 olympics in nazi germany.[84]
eventually, brundage won the debate, convincing the amateur athletic union to close a vote in favor of sending an american team to the berlin olympics. mahoney's efforts to incite a boycott of the olympic games in the united states failed.
us president franklin delano roosevelt and his administration did not become involved in the debate due to a tradition of allowing the us olympic committee to operate independently of government influence. however, several american diplomats including william e. dodd, the american ambassador to berlin, and george messersmith, head of the us legation in vienna, deplored the us olympic committee's decision to participate in the games.[75]

the 1940 summer olympics, officially known as the games of the xii olympiad, were originally scheduled to be held from september 21 to october 6, 1940, in tokyo, japan. they were rescheduled for helsinki, finland, to be held from july 20 to august 4, 1940, but were ultimately canceled due to the outbreak of world war ii. helsinki eventually hosted the 1952 summer olympics and tokyo the 1964 summer olympics.
the campaign to choose a city for 1940 began in 1932, with barcelona, rome, helsinki, and tokyo participating. tokyo city officials suggested a campaign as a means of international diplomacy following japan's alienation from the league of nations due to the mukden incident, in which japan occupied manchuria and created the puppet state of manchukuo.
while both tokyo officials and international olympic committee (ioc) representatives were behind the campaign, the national government, which was ever more interested in military matters, did not have any strong supporters for such a diplomatic gesture.[1] in 1936, tokyo was chosen in a surprise move, making it the first non-western city to win an olympic bid.
during the 1930 far eastern games in tokyo, indian participants were spotted flying the flag of their independence movement rather than the flag of british india. this caused a complaint from the british olympic association. in 1934 japan attempted to invite european colonies to  the far eastern games.[2]
the main stadium was to be meiji jingu stadium, later used at the 1964 summer olympics. the olympic village was to be built on the present sites of kinuta park or todoroki gorge. a schedule was drawn up, and guidelines were printed in four languages. monthly magazines and posters were printed and distributed internationally. construction began on some buildings, and arrangements were made with hotels, travel agents, and airlines for easy access.[3]
when the second sino-japanese war broke out on july 7, 1937, kono ichiro, a member of the diet (legislature), immediately requested that the olympics be forfeited.[4] the 1938 far eastern games were also canceled, but japan's ioc delegates persisted under a belief that the war would soon be over.[5] amid the intensification of the war, the feasibility of both the summer olympics and the 1940 winter olympics grew increasingly questionable to other countries, who suggested a different site be chosen and spoke of the possibility of boycotting the games were they to proceed in japan.[6]
in march 1938, the japanese provided reassurances to the ioc at the organization's cairo conference that tokyo would still be able to serve as the host city. however, many diet members in japan had already openly questioned hosting the olympics in wartime, and the military was unreasonably demanding that the organizers build the venues from wood because they needed metals for the war front.[7] in july, a legislative session was held to decide the matters of the summer and winter olympics and the planned 1940 world's fair all at once. the world's fair was only "postponed", under a belief that japan would be able to wrap up the war, but the olympics could not be moved and was canceled.[8]
kōichi kido, who would later be instrumental in the surrender of japan in 1945, announced the forfeiture on july 16, 1938. he closed his speech saying, "when peace reigns again in the far east, we can then invite the games to tokyo and take that opportunity to prove to the people of the world the true japanese spirit."[3] this would come to pass in 1964.
despite the cancellation of the 1940 olympics, the tokyo organizing committee released its budget for the games.  in a departure from standard practice, the budget included all capital outlays as well as direct organizing costs.  the total budget was ¥20.1 million, one-third of which would have been paid by the tokyo metropolitan government.[9]
the ioc then awarded the games to helsinki, finland, the city that had been the runner-up in the original bidding process. the games were then scheduled to be staged from july 20 to august 4, 1940. the olympic games were suspended indefinitely following the outbreak of world war ii (winter war in particular) and did not resume until the london games of 1948.
with the olympics canceled, the major international athletics event of the year turned out to be the annual finland-sweden athletics international, held at the new helsinki olympic stadium, exceptionally held as a triple international among finland, sweden and germany.
gliding was due to be an olympic sport in the 1940 games after a demonstration at the berlin games in 1936.[10][11] the sport has not been featured in any games since, though the glider designed for it, the dfs olympia meise, was produced in large numbers after the war.
meanwhile, japan hosted the 1940 east asian games in tokyo, with six participating nations. helsinki eventually held the 1952 summer olympics, while tokyo held the 1964 summer olympics and will hold the 2020 summer olympics.
during august 1940, prisoners of war celebrated a "special olympics" called the international prisoner-of-war olympic games at stalag xiii-a in langwasser, near nuremberg, germany. an olympic flag, 29 by 46 cm in size, was made of a polish prisoner's shirt and, drawn in crayon, it featured the olympic rings and banners for belgium, france, great britain, norway, poland, and the netherlands. a feature film, olimpiada '40, produced by the director andrzej kotkowski in 1980 tells the story of these games and of one of the prisoners of war, teodor niewiadomski.[12]
had the 1940 summer games been held, a never-before used method of bringing the olympic flame from nazi germany to japan was proposed — by air delivery, in the purpose-built messerschmitt me 261 adolfine long-range aircraft, which was designed to have a maximum range of some 11,024 km (6,850 mi) unrefueled.[13]
the 1944 summer olympics, which were to be officially known as the games of the xiii olympiad, were cancelled due to world war ii. it would have been held in london, united kingdom, which won the bid on the first ballot in a june 1939 ioc election over rome, detroit, lausanne, athens, budapest, helsinki and montreal. the selection was made at the 38th ioc session in london in 1939.[1]
because of the cancellation, london went on to host the 1948 summer olympics.
in spite of the war, the ioc organized many events to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of its foundation at its headquarters in lausanne, switzerland. held from 17 june to 19 june 1944, this celebration was referred to as "the jubilee celebrations of ioc" by carl diem, the originator of the modern tradition of the olympic torch relay.[2]
polish prisoners of war (pows) in the woldenberg (dobiegniew) oflag ii-c pow camp were granted permission by their german captors to stage an unofficial pow olympics during july 23 to august 13, 1944, and an olympic flag made with a bed sheet and pieces of coloured scarves was raised. the event has been considered to be a demonstration of the olympic spirit transcending war.[3]

the 1948 summer olympics, officially known as the games of the xiv olympiad, was an international multi-sport event which was held in london, united kingdom from 29 july to 14 august 1948.
after a twelve-year hiatus caused by the outbreak of world war ii; these were the first summer olympics held since the 1936 games in berlin. the 1940 olympic games had been scheduled for tokyo, and then for helsinki; the 1944 olympic games had been provisionally planned for london. this was the second occasion that london had hosted the olympic games, having previously hosted them in 1908, forty years earlier. the olympics would again return to london 64 years later in 2012, making london the first city to have hosted the games three times, and the only such city until paris and los angeles host their third games in 2024 and 2028, respectively. the 1948 olympic games were the first of two summer olympic games held under the ioc presidency of sigfrid edström.
the event came to be known as the austerity games, because of the difficult economic climate and rationing imposed in the aftermath of world war ii. no new venues were built for the games (with events taking place mainly at empire stadium and the empire pool at wembley park), and athletes were housed in existing accommodation at the wembley area instead of an olympic village, as were the 1936 berlin olympic games and the subsequent 1952 games in helsinki. a record 59 nations were represented by 4,104 athletes, 3,714 men and 390 women, in 19 sport disciplines. germany and japan were not invited to participate in the games; the soviet union was invited but chose not to send any athletes, sending observers instead to prepare for the 1952 olympics.
one of the star performers at the games was dutch sprinter fanny blankers-koen. dubbed "the flying housewife", the thirty-year-old mother of two won four gold medals in athletics. in the decathlon, american bob mathias became the youngest male ever to win an olympic gold medal at the age of seventeen. the most individual medals were won by veikko huhtanen of finland who took three golds, a silver and a bronze in men's gymnastics. the united states won the most gold and overall medals.
in june 1939, the international olympic committee (ioc) awarded the 1944 olympic summer games to london, ahead of rome, detroit, budapest, lausanne, helsinki, montreal and athens.[2] world war ii stopped the plans and the games were cancelled so london again stood as a candidate for 1948. great britain almost handed the 1948 games to the united states due to post-war financial and rationing problems, but king george vi said that this could be the chance to restore britain from world war ii. the official report of the london olympics shows that there was no case of london being pressed to run the games against its will. it says:
in june 1946 the ioc, through a postal vote, gave the summer games to london and the winter competition to st moritz. london was selected ahead of baltimore, minneapolis, lausanne, los angeles, and philadelphia.[4]
london, which had previously hosted the 1908 summer olympics, became the second city to host the olympics twice; paris hosted the event in 1900 and 1924. london later became the first city to host the olympics for a third time when the city hosted the 2012 summer olympics.
lord burghley, a gold medal winner at the 1928 olympics, member of the international olympic committee (ioc), and president of the amateur athletics association was named chairman of the organising and executive committees.[5] the other members of the committees were: colonel evan hunter, general secretary of the british olympic association, and chef de mission for great britain; lord aberdare, the other british member of the ioc; sir noel curtis-bennett;  alderman h.e. fern; e.j. holt; j. emrys lloyd, who became the committee's legal advisor; c.b. cowley of the london press and advertising; r.b. studdert, managing director of the army & navy stores; a.e. porritt, a member of the ioc for new zealand who resided in london; s.f. rous, secretary of the football association; and jack beresford.[6]
olympic pictograms were introduced for the first time. there were twenty of them—one for each olympic sport and three separate pictograms for the arts competition, the opening ceremony and the closing ceremony. they were called "olympic symbols" and intended for use on tickets. the background of each pictogram resembled an escutcheon.[7][8] olympic pictograms appeared again 16 years later, and were used at all subsequent summer olympics.
at the time of the games food, petrol and building were still subject to the rationing imposed during the war in britain; because of this the 1948 olympics came to be known as the "austerity games".[9] athletes were given the same increased rations as dockers and miners, 5,467 calories a day instead of the normal 2,600. building an olympic village was deemed too expensive, and athletes were housed in existing accommodation. male competitors stayed at raf camps in uxbridge and west drayton, and an army camp in richmond; female competitors in london colleges. the british red cross provided medical facilities at the richmond park camp.[10]
these were the first games to be held following the death of pierre de coubertin, founder of the international olympic committee, in 1937. they were also the last to include an arts competition, which took place at the victoria and albert museum.[11]
the games opened on 29 july. army bands began playing at 2 pm for the 85,000 spectators in empire stadium at wembley park. the international and national organisers arrived at 2.35 pm and king george vi and queen elizabeth, with queen mary and other members of the royal family, at 2.45 pm. fifteen minutes later the competitors entered the stadium in a procession that took 50 minutes. the last team was that of the united kingdom. when it had passed the saluting base, lord burghley began his welcome:
after welcoming the athletes to two weeks of "keen but friendly rivalry", he said london represented a "warm flame of hope for a better understanding in the world which has burned so low."[12]
at 4 pm, the time shown on big ben on the london games symbol, the king declared the games open, 2,500 pigeons were set free and the olympic flag raised to its 35 ft (11 m) flagpole at the end of the stadium. the royal horse artillery sounded a 21-gun salute and the last runner in the torch relay ran a lap of the track – created with cinders from the domestic coal fires of leicester – and climbed the steps to the olympic cauldron. after saluting the crowd, he turned and lit the flame. after more speeches, donald finlay of the british team (given his raf rank of wing commander) took the olympic oath on behalf of all competitors. the national anthem was sung and the massed athletes turned and marched out of the stadium, led by greece, tailed by britain.
the 580-page official report concluded:
the opening ceremony and over 60 hours of games coverage was broadcast live on bbc television, which was then only available to a small audience in the london area. the bbc paid £1,000 for the broadcasting rights.[14]
the 1948 summer olympics featured 136 medal events, covering 23 disciplines in 17 different sports and in arts.
in the list below, the number of events in each discipline is noted in parentheses.
these games also included lacrosse as a demonstration sport.
empire stadium was the venue for 33 athletics events at the games; 24 for men and nine for women. of these, four were making their olympic debut – the men's 10 km walk, and the women's 200 metres, long jump and shot put. a total of 754 athletes from 53 countries participated in athletics.[16] fanny blankers-koen of the netherlands, a 30-year-old mother of three children nicknamed "the flying housewife", won four gold medals, in the 100 metres, 200 metres, 80 metre high hurdles, and 4 x 100 metre relay. as world record holder in the long jump and high jump blankers-koen may have been able to win further medals but, at this time, female athletes were limited to three individual events.[17] duncan white won the first medal of any kind for sri lanka (then ceylon) when he finished second in the 400 metre hurdles. arthur wint became the first jamaican to win an olympic gold medal, in the men's 400 metres; he also won silver in the men's 800 metres.[18][19] alice coachman became the first woman of color in the world and the first african american woman to win a gold medal in track and field in the history of the modern olympics with a jump of 1.68 m (5' 6​1⁄4"). she also was the only american woman to win an athletics gold medal during the 1948 olympics.[20]
the marathon saw a dramatic finish with the first man to enter the stadium, etienne gailly of belgium, exhausted and nearly unable to run. while he was struggling, argentinian athlete delfo cabrera and tom richards of great britain passed him, with cabrera winning the gold medal and richards obtaining the silver. gailly managed to recover enough to cross the line for the bronze.[21]
the decathlon was won by 17-year-old bob mathias of the united states. he became the youngest ever olympic gold medallist in athletics and when asked how he would celebrate he replied: "i'll start shaving, i guess."[22][23]
categories: sports-related architecture, literature, music, painting, and sculpture. these olympics was the last time art competitions were considered olympic events.
basketball made its second appearance as a medal sport, appearing as an indoor competition for the first time after poor weather disrupted the matches at the 1936 berlin games. the event, for men only, was contested by 23 nations split into four pools for the preliminary round; the top two in each pool advanced to the quarterfinals with the other teams entering playoffs for the minor placings. the united states and france reached the final which was won by the americans 65–21 to claim the gold medal. this was the second of the united states' seven consecutive gold medals in olympic men's and women's basketball.[24] brazil defeated mexico 52–47 to claim bronze.[25]
eight different classifications were contested ranging from flyweight, for boxers weighing less than 51 kg, to heavyweight, for boxers over 80 kg. south africa, argentina and hungary each won two gold medals.
nine events were contested, eight for men and one for women. this marked the first time that a women's canoeing event had been contested in the olympics. sweden won four gold medals (two by gert fredriksson) and czechoslovakia three.
six events were contested – two road bicycle racing events and four track cycling events. no women's cycling events were contested. france won three gold medals and italy two, while great britain captured five medals overall, but none were gold.
four diving events were contested, two for men, and two for women. the events are labelled as 3  metre springboard and 10  metre platform by the international olympic committee but appeared on the 1948 official report as springboard diving and highboard diving, respectively.[26] all four gold medals, and 10 out of 12 awarded in total, were won by the united states. victoria manalo draves, who won both gold medals in the women's events, and sammy lee, who took a gold and a bronze in the men's events, became the first asian americans to win gold medals at an olympic games.[27]
six gold medals were awarded in equestrian, individual and team dressage, individual and team eventing and individual and team show jumping. harry llewellyn and foxhunter, who would claim a gold medal in helsinki, won bronze in the team jumping event.
seven events were contested, six for men and one for women. ilona elek, who had won the women's foil competition in berlin, was one of only two competitors to successfully defend an olympic title in london.[11] elek's sister, margit, placed sixth in the same event.[28] edoardo mangiarotti won three medals, two silver and a bronze, having previously won a gold medal in the 1936 games. throughout his career the italian won 13 olympic fencing medals and 27 world championship medals, both of which remain records.[29][30]
thirteen nations participated in the field hockey competition. the tournament was ultimately won by india, who defeated great britain to claim the country's first gold medal as an independent nation under captain kishan lal and vice-captain kunwar digvijay singh.
eighteen teams entered the football competition at these olympics. due to the rise of the professional game during the 12 years since the berlin olympics the number of talented amateurs for teams to select from was reduced. the gold medal was won by sweden, who defeated yugoslavia 3–1 in the final. denmark defeated hosts great britain, managed by matt busby of manchester united, 5–3 to win the bronze medal. in the tournament's 18 matches a total of 102 goals were scored; an average 5.66 goals per match. the joint top scorers with seven goals each were gunnar nordahl of sweden and denmark's john hansen. nordahl and swedish teammates gunnar gren and nils liedholm went on to play for a.c. milan and together were nicknamed gre-no-li.[31]
nine events were contested, eight for men, and one for women. in the men's pommel horse, a tie was declared between three competitors, all finns, and no medals other than gold were awarded in this event. finland won six gold medals overall, and switzerland three.
lacrosse was an exhibition sport at these olympics. an english team composed of players from various universities played a u.s. team represented by rensselaer polytechnic institute at the empire stadium.
only one modern pentathlon event was contested, the five component sports– riding, fencing, shooting, swimming, and running- being held over six days. scoring was by point-for-place system across the five phases with the winner being the athlete with the lowest combined ranking. the sport's international federation, the union internationale de pentathlon moderne was founded during the games, on 3 august 1948. sweden won two medals in the event; william grut won the gold, with a final points total of 16, and gösta gärdin took bronze. american george moore won the silver medal.[32]
seven rowing events were contested, all open to men only. great britain and the united states each claimed two gold medals. the events were held on the same course as the henley royal regatta.
the sailing events at the games took place in torquay, in the southwest of great britain.[33] five events were contested, with the united states winning four total medals.[34] one of host nation great britain's three gold medals at the games came in the swallow class from stewart morris and david bond. in the firefly class danish sailor paul elvstrøm won gold the despite the danish olympic committee having misgivings about sending him to compete as the 18-year-old could speak no english. this was the first of four consecutive olympics with a gold medal for elvstrøm.[33]
four events were contested, all open to both men and women, although all medals were won by men. in the 50 metre rifle, prone position, only two points separated the top three competitors. károly takács had been a member of the hungary's world champion pistol shooting team in 1938 when a grenade shattered his right hand – his pistol hand. takács taught himself to shoot with his left hand and, 10 years after his injury, he won an olympic gold medal in the rapid-fire pistol event.[35]
eleven events were contested, six for men and five for women. the united states won eight gold medals, including all six men's events, and 15 medals in total.
eighteen nations fielded a team in these games, which were ultimately won by italy, who were undefeated throughout. the tournament was conducted in a mult-tier bracket, with the best four teams from the group stages participating in a final round-robin bracket. silver was claimed by hungary, and bronze by the netherlands.
six events were contested, all for men only. these games marked the addition of the bantamweight class to the olympic programme, the first change to the programme since 1920. the united states won four gold medals, and eight overall; the remaining two gold medals were claimed by egypt.[36] rodney wilkes won the first medal for trinidad and tobago in an olympic games, winning silver in the featherweight division; the featherweight gold medal was won by egyptian mahmoud fayad, with a new olympic and world record of 332.5 kg.[37][38]
sixteen wrestling events were held, eight greco-roman and eight freestyle. all were open to men only. both categories were dominated by two nations. turkey was the most successful nation with six gold medals followed by sweden receiving 5 gold medals. these two teams claimed 24 total medals, in other words half of the total medals given.
london was the first olympics to have a political defection. marie provazníková, the 57-year-old czechoslovakian president of the international gymnastics federation, refused to return home, citing "lack of freedom" after the czechoslovak coup in february led to the country's inclusion in the soviet bloc.[39][40]
for the 1948 olympics, the technicolor corporation devised a bipack colour filming process – dubbed "technichrome" – whereby hundreds of hours of film documented the events in colour, without having to use expensive and heavy technicolor cameras.[41]
slightly over 2,000 journalists attended the 1948 games.[42]
no new venues were built for the games. a cinder track was laid inside empire stadium and all other venues were adapted.[9] for the first time at the olympics swimming events were held undercover, at the 8000 capacity empire pool. as the pool was longer than the standard olympic length of 50 metres a platform was constructed across the pool which both shortened it and housed officials.[35] in 2010 one of the last remaining venues from the games, the herne hill velodrome where cycling events were staged, was saved when a new 15-year lease was agreed meaning that repairs could take place. campaigners and users of the track had feared that it would be forced to close as it was in desperate need of refurbishment.[43]
a total of 59 nations sent athletes. fourteen made their first official appearance: british guiana (now guyana), burma (now myanmar), ceylon (now sri lanka), iran, iraq, jamaica, korea, lebanon, pakistan, puerto rico, singapore, syria, trinidad and tobago, and venezuela.[44] it was the first time that the philippines, india and pakistan competed as fully independent nations at the olympic games. germany and japan, both under allied military occupations, were not allowed to send athletes to the games. german forced labour was used for the construction of the facilities.[45] italy, although originally an axis power, defected to the allies in 1943 following benito mussolini being deposed, and was allowed to send athletes. the soviet union was invited but they chose not to send any athletes, sending observers instead to prepare for the 1952 olympics.[46] the number in parentheses indicates the number of participants that each country contributed.
these are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1948 summer games, ranked by number of gold medals won. the host nation was 12th, with 23 medals, including three golds.[47]

the 1952 summer olympics (finnish: kesäolympialaiset 1952; swedish: olympiska sommarspelen 1952), officially known as the games of the xv olympiad, were an international multi-sport event held in helsinki, finland, from july 19 to august 3, 1952.
helsinki had been earlier selected to host the 1940 summer olympics, which were cancelled due to world war ii. it is the northernmost city at which a summer olympic games have been held. these were the first games to be held in a non-indo-european language speaking country. it was also the olympic games at which the most number of world records were broken until surpassed by the 2008 summer olympics in beijing.[2] the soviet union, the people's republic of china, hong kong, indonesia, israel, thailand, and saarland made their olympic debuts in helsinki 1952. the united states won the most gold and overall medals.
helsinki was chosen as the host city over bids from amsterdam and five american cities at the 40th ioc session on june 21, 1947, in stockholm, sweden. minneapolis and los angeles finished tied for second in the final voting.
the voting results in chart below:[3]
in russian:только ощутив в руке тяжелый золотой кружок, я осознала, что произошло. ведь я первая советская олимпийская чемпионка, первая рекордсменка xv олимпиады... слезы щипали глаза. как я была счастлива!...
“every record won by our sportsmen, every victory in international contests, graphically demonstrates to the whole world the advantages and strength of the soviet system.”the 1952 summer olympics featured 17 different sports encompassing 23 disciplines, and medals were awarded in 149 events. in the list below, the number of events in each discipline is noted in parentheses.
with an annual average temperature of 5.9 °c, helsinki is one of the coldest cities to have hosted the summer olympics.[9]
a total of 69 nations participated in these games, up from 59 in the 1948 games. thirteen nations made their first olympic appearance in 1952: the bahamas, the people's republic of china, gold coast (now ghana), guatemala, hong kong, indonesia, israel, netherlands antilles, nigeria, soviet union (ussr), thailand, and vietnam.
japan and germany were both reinstated and permitted to send athletes after being banned for 1948 for their instigation of world war ii. due to the division of germany, german athletes from saar entered a separate team for the only time. only west germany would provide athletes for the actual germany team, since east germany refused to participate in a joint german team.
these are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1952 games.[10]
the 50th anniversary of the helsinki olympic games was the main motif for one of the first finnish euro silver commemorative coins, the €10 silver coin minted in 2002. the reverse depicts part of the helsinki olympic stadium, as well as a section of the 1952 500 markka coin. the obverse has lettering suomi finland 10 euro, a flame, and finland is the only country highlighted on earth.
notes
citations

the 1956 summer olympics, officially known as the games of the xvi olympiad, was an international multi-sport event that was held in melbourne, victoria, australia from 22 november to 8 december 1956, with the exception of the equestrian events, which were held in stockholm, sweden in june 1956.
these games were the first to be staged in the southern hemisphere and oceania, as well as the first to be held outside europe and north america. melbourne is the most southerly city ever to host the olympics. due to the southern hemisphere's seasons being different from those in the northern hemisphere, the 1956 games did not take place at the usual time of year, because of the need to hold the events during the warmer weather of the host's spring/summer (which corresponds to the northern hemisphere's autumn/winter).
the olympic equestrian events could not be held in melbourne due to australia's strict quarantine regulations, so they were held in stockholm five months earlier. this was the second time that the olympics were not held entirely in one country, the first being the 1920 summer olympics, which were held in antwerp, belgium, with some events taking place in ostend, belgium and amsterdam, netherlands. despite uncertainties and various complications encountered during the preparations, the 1956 games went ahead in melbourne as planned and turned out to be a success. the enduring tradition of national teams parading as one during the closing ceremony was started at these olympics.
several teams boycotted the games in protest of the ioc's rejection to suspend the ussr after their invasion of hungary. the soviet union won the most gold and overall medals.
melbourne was selected as the host city over bids from buenos aires, mexico city, montreal and six american cities on 28 april 1949, at the 43rd ioc session in rome, italy.[2]
many members of the ioc were sceptical about melbourne as an appropriate site. its location in the southern hemisphere was a major concern since the reversal of seasons would mean the games must be held during the northern winter. the november–december schedule was thought likely to inconvenience athletes from the northern hemisphere, who were accustomed to resting during their winter.[citation needed]
notwithstanding these concerns, the field of candidates eventually narrowed to two southern hemisphere cities, these being melbourne and buenos aires, argentina. melbourne was selected, in 1949, to host the 1956 olympics by a one-vote margin. the first sign of trouble was the revelation that australian equine quarantine would prevent the country from hosting the equestrian events.[citation needed] stockholm was selected as the alternative site, so equestrian competition began on 10 june, five and a half months before the rest of the olympic games were to open.
the above problems of the melbourne games were compounded by bickering over financing among australian politicians. faced with a housing shortage, the premier of victoria (henry bolte) refused to allocate money for the olympic village (eventually sited in heidelberg west), and the country's prime minister (robert menzies) barred the use of federal funds.[citation needed]
at one point, ioc president avery brundage suggested that rome, which was to host the 1960 games, was so far ahead of melbourne in preparations that it might be ready as a replacement site in 1956.
as late as april 1955, brundage was still doubtful about melbourne and was not satisfied by an inspection trip to the city. construction was well under way by then, thanks to a $4.5 million federal loan to victoria, but it was behind schedule. he still held out the possibility that rome might have to step in.
by the beginning of 1956, though, it was obvious that melbourne would be ready for the olympics.[4]
egypt, iraq, and lebanon announced that they would not participate in the olympics in response to the suez crisis when egypt was invaded by israel, the united kingdom, and france.
the netherlands, cambodia, spain, and switzerland boycotted the event in protest at the 
soviet union presence in light of their recent crushing of the hungarian revolution.
the people's republic of china chose to boycott the event because the republic of china had been allowed to compete.
although the number of countries participating (67) was almost the same as in 1952 (69), the number of athletes competing dropped sharply, from 4,925 to 3,342. (this figure does not include the 158 athletes from 29 countries who took part in the stockholm equestrian competition.)
once underway, the games progressed smoothly, and came to be known as the "friendly games". betty cuthbert, an 18-year-old from sydney, won the 100 and 200 metre sprint races and ran an exceptional final leg in the 4 x 100 metre relay to overcome great britain's lead and claim her third gold medal. the veteran shirley strickland repeated her 1952 win in the 80 metre hurdles and was also part of the winning 4 x 100 metre relay team, bringing her career olympic medal total to seven: three golds, a silver, and three bronze medals.
australia also triumphed in swimming. they won all of the freestyle races, men's and women's, and collected a total of eight gold, four silver and two bronze medals. murray rose became the first male swimmer to win two freestyle events since johnny weissmuller in 1924, while dawn fraser won gold medals in the 100 metre freestyle and as the leadoff swimmer in the 4 x 100 metre relay team.
the men's track and field events were dominated by the united states. they not only won 15 of the 24 events, they swept four of them and took first and second place in five others. bobby morrow led the way with gold medals in the 100 and 200 metre sprints and the 4 x 100 metre relay. tom courtney barely overtook great britain's derek johnson in the 800 metre run, then collapsed from the exertion and needed medical attention.
ireland's ronnie delany ran an outstanding 53.8 over the last 400 metres to win the 1,500 metre run, in which favourite john landy of australia finished third.
there was a major upset, marred briefly by controversy, in the 3,000 metre steeplechase. little-known chris brasher of great britain finished well ahead of the field, but the judges disqualified him for interfering with norway's ernst larsen, and they announced sándor rozsnyói of hungary as the winner. brasher's appeal was supported by larsen, rozsnyói, and fourth-place finisher heinz laufer of germany. subsequently, the decision was reversed and brasher became the first briton to win a gold medal in track and field since 1936.
only two world records were set in track and field. mildred mcdaniel, the first american woman to win gold in the sport, set a high jump record of 1.76 metres (5.8 ft), and egil danielsen of norway overcame blustery conditions with a remarkable javelin throw of 85.71 metres (281.2 ft).
throughout the olympics, hungarian athletes were cheered by fans from australia and other countries. many of them gathered in the boxing arena when thirty-year-old laszlo papp of hungary won his third gold medal by beating josé torres for the light-middleweight championship.
a few days later, the crowd was with the hungarian water polo team in its match against the soviet union which took place against the background of the soviet invasion of hungary. the game became rough and, when a hungarian was forced to leave the pool with a bleeding wound above his eye, a riot almost broke out. the police restored order and the game was called early, with hungary leading 4–0, and the hungarians went on to win the gold medal.
in a much publicized olympic romance, american hammer throw champion hal connolly would marry czechoslovak discus throw champion, olga fikotová. after moving to the united states, olga wanted to continue representing czechoslovakia, but the czech olympic committee would not allow her to do so.[5] thereafter, as olga connolly, she took part in every olympics until 1972[5] competing for the u.s.[6] she was the flag bearer for the u.s. team at the 1972 summer olympics.
despite the international tensions of 1956—or perhaps because of them—a young melburnian, john ian wing, came up with a new idea for the closing ceremony. instead of marching as separate teams, behind their national flags, the athletes mingled together as they paraded into and around the arena for a final appearance before the spectators. it was the start of an olympic tradition that has been followed ever since.[7]
the olympic flame was relayed to melbourne after being lit at olympia on 2 november 1956. 
while the olympic flame was being carried to sydney, an australian veterinary student named barry larkin carried a fake olympic flame and fooled the mayor of sydney.[8]
the 1956 summer olympics featured 17 different sports encompassing 23 disciplines, and medals were awarded in 151 events (145 events in melbourne and 6 equestrian events in stockholm).[9] in the list below, the number of events in each discipline is noted in parentheses.
a total of 67 nations competed in the 1956 olympics. eight countries made their olympic debuts: cambodia (only competed in the equestrian events in stockholm), ethiopia, fiji, kenya, liberia, federation of malaya, north borneo (modern-day sabah of malaysia), and uganda. athletes from east germany and west germany competed together as the united team of germany, an arrangement that would last until 1968.
for the first time, the team of republic of china effectively represented only taiwan.
five nations competed in the equestrian events in stockholm, but did not attend the games in melbourne. egypt did not compete in melbourne due to the suez crisis, whilst the netherlands, spain and switzerland all boycotted the melbourne olympics in protest at the soviet invasion of hungary.[10]
these are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1956 games.
  *   host nation (australia)
the 1960 summer olympics, officially known as the games of the xvii olympiad (italian: giochi della xvii olimpiade), was an international multi-sport event that was held from august 25 to september 11, 1960, in rome, italy. the city of rome had previously been awarded the administration of the 1908 summer olympics, but following the eruption of mount vesuvius in 1906, rome had no choice but to decline and pass the honour to london. the soviet union won the most gold and overall medals.
on june 15, 1955, at the 50th ioc session in paris, france, rome won the rights to host the 1960 games, having beaten brussels, mexico city, tokyo, detroit, budapest and finally lausanne. tokyo and mexico city would subsequently host the proceeding 1964 and 1968 summer olympics respectively.[2]
toronto was initially interested in the bidding, but appears to have dropped out during the final phase of the bid process.[3] this was the first of five unsuccessful attempts by toronto to secure the summer olympics from then until the 2008 games.
1 new facilities constructed in preparation for the olympic games. 2 existing facilities modified or refurbished in preparation for the olympic games.
a total of 83 nations participated at the rome games. athletes from morocco, san marino, sudan, and tunisia competed at the olympic games for the first time.
athletes from barbados, jamaica and trinidad and tobago would represent the new (british) west indies federation, competing as "antilles", but this nation would only exist for this single olympiad. athletes from northern rhodesia and southern rhodesia competed under the rhodesia name while representing the federation of rhodesia and nyasaland. athletes from east germany and west germany would compete as the united team of germany from 1956 to 1964. the number in parentheses indicates the number of participants that each country contributed.
the 1960 summer olympics featured 17 different sports encompassing 23 disciplines, and medals were awarded in 150 events. in the list below, the number of events in each discipline is noted in parentheses.

these are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1960 games:[11]
the 1964 summer olympics, officially known as the games of the xviii olympiad (japanese: 第十八回オリンピック競技大会, hepburn: dai jūhachi-kai orinpikku kyōgi taikai), was an international multi-sport event held in tokyo, japan, from 10 to 24 october 1964. tokyo had been awarded the organization of the 1940 summer olympics, but this honour was subsequently passed to helsinki because of japan's invasion of china, before ultimately being cancelled because of world war ii.
the 1964 summer games were the first olympics held in asia, and the first time south africa was barred from taking part due to its apartheid system in sports.[2][3] (south africa was, however, allowed to compete at the 1964 summer paralympics, also held in tokyo, where it made its paralympic games debut.)[4] tokyo was chosen as the host city during the 55th ioc session in west germany, on 26 may 1959.
these games were also the first to be telecast internationally without the need for tapes to be flown overseas, as they had been for the 1960 olympics four years earlier. the games were telecast to the united states using syncom 3, the first geostationary communication satellite, and from there to europe using relay 1.[5] these were also the first olympic games to have color telecasts, albeit  partially.  certain events like the sumo wrestling and judo matches, sports huge in japan, were tried out using toshiba's new colour transmission system, but only for the domestic market.  history surrounding the 1964 olympics was chronicled in the 1965 documentary film tokyo olympiad, directed by kon ichikawa.
the games were scheduled for mid-october to avoid the city's midsummer heat and humidity and the september typhoon season.[6] the previous olympics in rome in 1960 started in late august and experienced hot weather. the following games in 1968 in mexico city also began in october.
the 1964 olympics were also the last to use a traditional cinder track for the track events.  a smooth, synthetic, all-weather track was used for the first time at the 1968 olympics and at every olympiad thereafter. the united states won the most gold medals, while the soviet union won the most overall medals.
tokyo won the rights to the games on 26 may 1959 at the 55th ioc session in munich, west germany, over bids from detroit, brussels and vienna.[7]
toronto was an early bidder again in 1964 after the failed attempt for 1960 and failed to make the final round.[8]
the 1964 summer olympics featured 19 different sports encompassing 25 disciplines, and medals were awarded in 163 events. in the list below, the number of events in each discipline is noted in parentheses.
note: in the japan olympic committee report, sailing is listed as "yachting".[13]
these are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1964 games.
conventionally, countries are ranked by the number of gold medals they receive, followed then by the number of silver medals and, finally, bronze.[31]
ninety-three nations were represented at the 1964 games. sixteen nations made their first olympic appearance in tokyo: algeria, cameroon, chad, congo, côte d'ivoire (as ivory coast), dominican republic, libya (but it withdrew before the competition), madagascar, malaysia, mali, mongolia, nepal, niger, northern rhodesia, senegal, and tanzania (as tanganyika).
northern rhodesia achieved full independence as zambia on the same day as the closing ceremony. athletes from southern rhodesia competed under the banner of rhodesia; this was the last of three appearances at the summer olympics by a rhodesian representation. zimbabwe would later make its first appearance at the 1980 summer olympics.
athletes from east germany and west germany competed together as the united team of germany, as they had done previously in 1956 and 1960.
indonesia was banned from the 1964 olympics, due to its refusal to allow israeli and taiwanese athletes visas at the 1962 asian games.

these games were the first to be telecast internationally. the games were telecast to the united states using syncom 3,[33] the first geostationary communication satellite, and from there to europe using relay 1, an older satellite which allowed only 15–20 minutes of broadcast during each of its orbits.[34][35] total broadcast time of programs delivered via satellite was 5 hours 41 minutes in the united states, 12 hours 27 minutes in europe, and 14 hours 18 minutes in canada. pictures were received via satellite in the united states, canada, and 21 countries in europe.[36] several broadcasters recorded some sports from japan and flown over to their countries.
transpac-1, the first trans-pacific communications cable from japan to hawaii was also finished in june 1964 in time for these games. before this, most communications from japan to other countries were via shortwave.[36]
the start of operations for the first japanese bullet train (the tokaido shinkansen) between tokyo station and shin-ōsaka station was scheduled to coincide with the olympic games. the first regularly scheduled train ran on 1 october 1964, just nine days before the opening of the games, transporting passengers 515 kilometers (320 mi) in about four hours, and connecting the three major metropolitan areas of tokyo, nagoya, and osaka.
some already-planned upgrades to both highways and commuter rail lines were rescheduled for completion in time for these games. of the eight main expressways approved by the tokyo metropolitan government in 1959, no. 1, no. 4 and a portion of no. 2 and no. 3 were completed for the games. two subway lines totaling 22 kilometers (14 mi) were also completed in time for the games, and the port of tokyo facilities were expanded to handle the anticipated traffic.[37]
the oxford olympics study established the outturn cost of the tokyo 1964 summer olympics at us$282 million in 2015-dollars.[38] this includes sports-related costs only, that is, (i) operational costs incurred by the organizing committee for the purpose of staging the games, e.g., expenditures for technology, transportation, workforce, administration, security, catering, ceremonies, and medical services, and (ii) direct capital costs incurred by the host city and country or private investors to build, e.g., the competition venues, the olympic village, international broadcast center, and media and press center, which are required to host the games. indirect capital costs are not included, such as for road, rail, or airport infrastructure, or for hotel upgrades or other business investment incurred in preparation for the games but not directly related to staging the games. the cost for tokyo 1964 compares with costs of usd 4.6 billion for rio 2016, usd 40-44 billion for beijing 2008 and usd 51 billion for sochi 2014, the most expensive olympics in history. average cost for summer games since 1960 is usd 5.2 billion.
the 1964 summer olympics in tokyo celebrated japan's progress and reemergence on the world stage. the new japan was no longer a wartime enemy, but a peaceful country that threatened no one, and this transformation was accomplished in fewer than 20 years.[39]
to host such a major event, tokyo's infrastructure needed to be modernized in time for large numbers of expected tourists. enormous energy and expense was devoted to upgrading the city's physical infrastructure, including new buildings, highways, stadiums, hotels, airports and trains.  there was a new satellite to facilitate live international broadcast.  multiple train and subway lines, a large highway building project, and the tokaido shinkansen, the fastest train in the world, were completed. haneda international airport and the port of tokyo were modernized. international satellite broadcasting was initiated, and japan was now connected to the world with a new undersea communications cable.[36] the ys-11, a commercial turboprop plane developed in japan, was used to transport the olympic flame within japan.[40] for swimming, a new timing system started the clock by the sound of the starter gun and stopped it with touchpads. the photo finish using a photograph with lines on it was introduced to determine the results of sprints. all of this demonstrated that japan was now part of the first world and a technological leader, and at the same time demonstrated how other countries might modernize.[39]  in preparation for the games, 200,000 stray cats and dogs were rounded-up and euthanized.[41]
unfortunately, however, the construction projects resulted in some environmental damage, forced relocations for some residents, and loss of some industries.  in addition, corruption by politicians and construction companies resulted in cost overruns and some shoddy work.[41]
although public opinion about the olympics in japan had initially been split, by the time the games started almost everyone was behind them. the broadcast of the opening ceremony was watched by over 70% of the viewing public, and the women's volleyball team's gold medal match was watched by over 80%.[39]
as with many other olympics, observers later stated that 1964 olympic preparation and construction projects had had a negative effect on the environment and lower income people.[42]
the cary grant film walk, don't run was filmed during the tokyo olympics, and set in tokyo during the olympics. a message at the beginning of the film thanks the japanese government and tokyo police for putting up with them filming in crowded tokyo.
the studio ghibli film from up on poppy hill takes place one year before the tokyo olympics and refers to the upcoming games. the official poster can be seen several times in the film.
tokyo attempted to bring the olympic games back to the city, having unsuccessfully bid for the 2016 summer olympics, which were awarded to rio de janeiro. however, tokyo will host the 2020 summer olympics and 2020 summer paralympics games, and will be the first asian city to host the games twice.[43]
the japan society fall 2019 exhibition, made in tokyo: architecture and living, 1964/2020, is an architectural exhibition that examines the social, cultural, economic, and political impacts of the 1964 tokyo olympics on the modernization of the tokyo landscape (homes, offices, retail businesses, athletic stadiums, hotels, and transportation stations). the exhibition was curated by the japanese architectural firm atelier bow-wow.[44]
north korea withdrew its athletes from the 1964 summer olympics just before the games were due to start, as the ioc were refusing to accept any athletes who had participated in the games of the new emerging forces (ganefo) held in jakarta, indonesia, in 1963. china and indonesia also chose not to attend the tokyo games due to ganefo issues.
the 1968 summer olympics (spanish: juegos olímpicos de verano de 1968), officially known as the games of the xix olympiad, was an international multi-sport event held in mexico city, mexico, from october 12 to the 27th.
these were the first olympic games to be staged in latin america and the first to be staged in a spanish-speaking country. they were the first games to use an all-weather (smooth) track for track and field events instead of the traditional cinder track.
the 1968 games were the third to be held in the last quarter of the year, after the 1956 games in melbourne and the 1964 games in tokyo. the mexican student movement of 1968 happened concurrently and the olympic games were correlated to the government's repression. the united states won the most gold and overall medals.
on october 18, 1963, at the 60th ioc session in baden-baden, west germany, mexico city finished ahead of bids from detroit, buenos aires and lyon to host the games.[2]
the 1968 torch relay recreated the route taken by christopher columbus to the new world, journeying from greece through italy and spain to san salvador island, bahamas, and then on to mexico.[4]  american sculptor james metcalf, an expatriate in mexico, won the commission to forge the olympic torch for the 1968 summer games.[5]
south africa was provisionally invited to the games, on the understanding that all segregation and discrimination in sport would be eliminated by the 1972 games. however, african countries and african american athletes promised to boycott the games if south africa was present, and eastern bloc countries threatened to do likewise. in april 1968 the ioc conceded that "it would be most unwise for south africa to participate".[19]
responding to growing social unrest and protests, the government of mexico had increased economic and political suppression, against labor unions in particular, in the decade building up to the olympics. a series of protest marches in the city in august gathered significant attendance, with an estimated 500,000 taking part on august 27. president gustavo díaz ordaz ordered the occupation[by whom?] of the national autonomous university of mexico in september, but protests continued. using the prominence brought by the olympics, students gathered in plaza de las tres culturas in tlatelolco to call for greater civil and democratic rights and showed disdain for the olympics with slogans such as ¡no queremos olimpiadas, queremos revolución! ("we don't want olympics, we want revolution!").[20][21]
ten days before the start of the olympics, the government ordered the gathering in plaza de las tres culturas to be broken up. some 5000 soldiers and 200 tankettes surrounded the plaza. hundreds of protesters and civilians were killed and over 1000 were arrested. at the time, the event was portrayed in the national media as the military suppression of a violent student uprising, but later analysis indicates that the gathering was peaceful prior to the army's advance.[22][23][24]
on october 16, 1968, african american sprinters tommie smith and john carlos, the gold and bronze medalists in the men's 200-meter race, took their places on the podium for the medal ceremony wearing black socks without shoes and human rights badges, lowered their heads and each defiantly raised a black-gloved fist as the star spangled banner was played, in solidarity with the black freedom movement in the united states. both were members of the olympic project for human rights. international olympic committee (ioc) president avery brundage deemed it to be a domestic political statement unfit for the apolitical, international forum the olympic games were intended to be. in response to their actions, he ordered smith and carlos suspended from the us team and banned from the olympic village. when the us olympic committee refused, brundage threatened to ban the entire us track team. this threat led to the expulsion of the two athletes from the games.[25]
peter norman, the australian sprinter who came second in the 200 m race, also wore an olympic project for human rights badge during the medal ceremony. norman was the one who suggested that carlos and smith wear one glove each. his actions resulted in him being ostracized by australian media[26] and a reprimand by his country's olympic authorities. he was not sent to the 1972 games, despite several times making the qualifying time,[27] though opinion differ over whether that was due to the 1968 protest.[28] when australia hosted the 2000 summer olympics, he had no part in the opening ceremony, though the significance of that is also debated.[28] in 2006, after norman died of a heart attack, smith and carlos were pallbearers at norman's funeral.[29]
in another notable incident in the gymnastics competition, while standing on the medal podium after the balance beam event final, in which natalia kuchinskaya of the soviet union had controversially taken the gold, czechoslovakian gymnast věra čáslavská quietly turned her head down and away during the playing of the soviet national anthem. the action was čáslavská's silent protest against the recent soviet invasion of czechoslovakia. her protest was repeated when she accepted her medal for her floor exercise routine when the judges changed the preliminary scores of the soviet larisa petrik to allow her to tie with čáslavská for the gold. while čáslavská's countrymen supported her actions and her outspoken opposition to communism (she had publicly signed and supported ludvik vaculik's "two thousand words" manifesto), the new regime responded by banning her from both sporting events and international travel for many years and made her an outcast from society until the fall of communism.
the 1968 summer olympic program featured 172 events in the following 18 sports:
the organizers declined to hold a judo tournament at the olympics, even though it had been a full-medal sport four years earlier.  this was the last time judo was not included in the olympic games.
east germany and west germany competed as separate entities for the first time in at a summer olympiad, and would remain so through 1988.  barbados competed for the first time as an independent country. also competing for the first time in a summer olympiad were british honduras (now belize), central african republic, the democratic republic of the congo (as congo-kinshasa), el salvador, guinea, honduras, kuwait, nicaragua, paraguay, sierra leone, and the united states virgin islands. singapore returned to the games as an independent country after competing as part of the malaysian team in 1964. suriname and libya actually competed for the first time (in 1960 and 1964, respectively, they took part in the opening ceremony, but their athletes withdrew from the competition.)

north korea withdrew from the 1968 games because of two incidents that strained its relations with the ioc. first, the ioc had barred north korean track and field athletes from the 1968 games because they had participated in the rival games of the new emerging forces (ganefo) in 1966. secondly, the ioc had ordered the nation to compete under the name "north korea" in the 1968 games, whereas the country itself would have preferred its official name: "democratic people's republic of korea".[30]
these are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1968 games. host mexico won 9 medals in total.
the 1972 summer olympics (german: olympische sommerspiele 1972), officially known as the games of the xx olympiad, was an international multi-sport event held in munich, west germany, from 26 august to 11 september 1972.
the sporting nature of the event was largely overshadowed by the munich massacre in the second week, in which eleven israeli athletes and coaches and a west german police officer at olympic village were killed by black september terrorists.
the 1972 summer olympics were the second summer olympics to be held in germany, after the 1936 games in berlin, which had taken place under the nazi regime. the west german government had been eager to have the munich olympics present a democratic and optimistic germany to the world, as shown by the games' official motto, "die heiteren spiele",[2] or "the cheerful games".[3] the logo of the games was a blue solar logo (the "bright sun") by otl aicher, the designer and director of the visual conception commission.[4] the olympic mascot, the dachshund "waldi", was the first officially named olympic mascot. the olympic fanfare was composed by herbert rehbein.[5] the soviet union won the most gold and overall medals.
the olympic park (olympiapark) is based on frei otto's plans and after the games became a munich landmark. the competition sites, designed by architect günther behnisch, included the olympic swimming hall, the olympics hall (olympiahalle, a multipurpose facility) and the olympic stadium (olympiastadion), and an olympic village very close to the park. the design of the stadium was considered revolutionary, with sweeping canopies of acrylic glass stabilized by metal ropes, used on such a large scale for the first time.[6]
munich won its olympic bid on april 26, 1966, at the 64th ioc session at rome, italy, over bids presented by detroit, madrid, and montréal. montréal would eventually host the following olympic games in 1976.[8]
the games were largely overshadowed by what has come to be known as the "munich massacre". just before dawn on september 5, a group of eight members of the black september terrorist organization broke into the olympic village and took eleven israeli athletes, coaches and officials hostage in their apartments. two of the hostages who resisted were killed in the first moments of the break-in; the subsequent standoff in the olympic village lasted for almost 18 hours.
late in the evening of september 5 that same day, the terrorists and their nine remaining hostages were transferred by helicopter to the military airport of fürstenfeldbruck, ostensibly to board a plane bound for an undetermined arab country. the german authorities planned to ambush them there, but underestimated the numbers of their opposition and were thus undermanned. during a botched rescue attempt, all of the israeli hostages were killed. four of them were shot, then incinerated when one of the terrorists detonated a grenade inside the helicopter in which the hostages were sitting. the 5 remaining hostages were then machine-gunned to death.
—after a series of conflicting reports and rumours, jim mckay of abc brought the news at 3:24 a.m. local time.[9]
all but three of the terrorists were killed as well. although arrested and imprisoned pending trial, they were released by the west german government on october 29, 1972, in exchange for a hijacked lufthansa jet. two of those three were supposedly hunted down and assassinated later by the mossad.[10] jamal al-gashey, who is believed to be the sole survivor, is still living today in hiding in an unspecified african country with his wife and two children. the olympic events were suspended several hours after the initial attack, but once the incident was concluded, avery brundage, the international olympic committee president, declared that "the games must go on". a memorial ceremony was then held in the olympic stadium, and the competitions resumed after a stoppage of 34 hours.[11] the attack prompted heightened security at subsequent olympics beginning with the 1976 winter olympics. security at olympics was heightened further beginning with the 2002 winter olympics, as they were the first to take place after the 2001 september 11 attacks.
the massacre led the german federal government to re-examine its anti-terrorism policies, which at the time were dominated by a pacifist approach adopted after world war ii. this led to the creation of the elite counter-terrorist unit gsg 9, similar to the british sas. it also led israel to launch a campaign known as operation wrath of god, in which those suspected of involvement were systematically tracked down and assassinated.
the events of the munich massacre were chronicled in the oscar-winning documentary, one day in september.[12] an account of the aftermath is also dramatized in three films: the 1976 made-for-tv movie 21 hours at munich, the 1986 made-for-tv movie sword of gideon[13] and steven spielberg's 2005 film munich.[14] in her film 1972, artist sarah morris interviews dr. georg sieber, a former police psychiatrist who advised the olympics' security team, about the events and aftermath of black september.[15]
the oxford olympics study established the outturn cost of the munich 1972 summer olympics at usd 1.0 billion in 2015-dollars.[19] this includes sports-related costs only, that is, (i) operational costs incurred by the organizing committee for the purpose of staging the games, e.g., expenditures for technology, transportation, workforce, administration, security, catering, ceremonies, and medical services, and (ii) direct capital costs incurred by the host city and country or private investors to build, e.g., the competition venues, the olympic village, international broadcast center, and media and press center, which are required to host the games. indirect capital costs are not included, such as for road, rail, or airport infrastructure, or for hotel upgrades or other business investment incurred in preparation for the games but not directly related to staging the games. the cost for munich 1972 compares with costs of usd 4.6 billion for rio 2016, usd 15 billion for london 2012 (the most costly summer olympics to date) and usd 21 billion for sochi 2014 — the most expensive olympic games in history.[20] average cost for summer games since 1960 is usd 5.2 billion.
the 1972 summer olympic programme featured 195 events in the following 21 sports:
eleven nations made their first olympic appearance in munich: albania, dahomey (now benin), gabon, north korea, lesotho, malawi, saudi arabia, somalia, swaziland, togo, upper volta (now burkina faso).
rhodesia's invitation to take part in the 1972 summer games was withdrawn by the international olympic committee four days before the opening ceremony, in response to african countries' (such as ethiopia and kenya) protests against the rhodesian government. (rhodesia did, however, compete in the 1972 summer paralympics, held a little earlier in heidelberg.)[21][22]

‡ no medals were awarded on 5 september as all olympic competitions were suspended during the course of the day for a period of twenty four hours due to the munich massacre.
note: the memorial service was held in the olympic stadium on 6 september which was attended by 80,000 spectators and 3,000 athletes. following this all olympic competitions were then allowed to resume.

these are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1972 games.
  *   host nation (west germany)

the 1976 summer olympics, officially called the games of the xxi olympiad (french: les xxies olympiques d'été), was an international multi-sport event in montreal, canada, in 1976, and the first olympic games held in canada.
montreal was awarded the rights to the 1976 games on may 12, 1970, at the 69th ioc session in amsterdam, over the bids of moscow and los angeles. it was the first and, so far, only summer olympic games to be held in canada. calgary and vancouver later hosted the winter olympic games in 1988 and 2010, respectively.
twenty-nine countries, mostly african, boycotted the montreal games when the international olympic committee (ioc) refused to ban new zealand, after the new zealand national rugby union team had toured south africa earlier in 1976 in defiance of the united nations' calls for a sporting embargo. the soviet union won the most gold and overall medals.
the vote occurred on may 12, 1970, at the 69th ioc session in amsterdam, netherlands. while los angeles and moscow were viewed as the favourites given that they represented the world's two main powers, many of the smaller countries supported montreal as an underdog and as a relatively neutral site for the games. los angeles was eliminated after the first round and montreal won in the second round. moscow would go on to host the 1980 summer olympics and los angeles the 1984 summer olympics. one blank vote was cast in the second and final round.[2][3][4]
toronto had made its third attempt for the olympics but failed to get the support of the canadian olympic committee, which selected montreal instead.[5]
robert bourassa, then the premier of quebec, first asked prime minister pierre trudeau to advise canada's monarch, elizabeth ii, to attend the opening of the games. however, bourassa later became unsettled about how unpopular the move might be with sovereigntists in the province, annoying trudeau, who had already made arrangements.[6] the leader of the parti québécois at the time, rené lévesque, sent his own letter to buckingham palace, asking the queen to refuse her prime minister's request, though she did not oblige lévesque as he was out of his jurisdiction in offering advice to the sovereign.[7]
in 1976, trudeau, succumbing to pressure from the people's republic of china, issued an order barring taiwan from participating as china in the 1976 montreal olympics, although technically it was a matter for the ioc.[8]  his action strained relations with the united states – from president ford, future president carter and the press.[9][8]
the oxford olympics study estimates the outturn cost of the montreal 1976 summer olympics at usd 6.1 billion in 2015-dollars and cost overrun at 720% in real terms.[10] this includes sports-related costs only, that is, (i) operational costs incurred by the organizing committee for the purpose of staging the games, e.g., expenditures for technology, transportation, workforce, administration, security, catering, ceremonies, and medical services, and (ii) direct capital costs incurred by the host city and country or private investors to build, e.g., the competition venues, the olympic village, international broadcast center, and media and press center, which are required to host the games. indirect capital costs are not included, such as for road, rail, or airport infrastructure, or for hotel upgrades or other business investment incurred in preparation for the games but not directly related to staging the games. the cost overrun for montreal 1976 is the highest cost overrun on record for any olympics. the cost and cost overrun for montreal 1976 compares with costs of usd 4.6 billion and a cost overrun of 51% for rio 2016 and usd 15 billion and 76% for london 2012. average cost for the summer games from 1960 to 2016 is 5.2 billion 2015 us dollars, average cost overrun is 176%.
much of the cost overruns were caused by the conseil des métiers de la construction union whose leader was andré "dede" desjardins, and who kept the construction site in "anarchic disorder" as part of a shakedown.[11] the french architect roger taillibert who designed the olympic stadium recounted in his 2000 book notre cher stade olympique that he and montreal mayor jean drapeau tried hard to buy off desjardins, even taking him to a lunch at the exclusive ritz-carlton hotel in a vain attempt to end the "delays".[11] ultimately quebec premier robert bourassa made some sort of secret deal to buy off desjardins, which finally allowed work to proceed.[11] taillibert wrote in notre cher stade olympique "if the olympic games took place, it was thanks to dede desjardins. what irony!"[11]
the opening ceremony of the 1976 summer olympic games was held on saturday, july 17, 1976, at the olympic stadium in montreal, quebec, in front of an audience of some 73,000 in the stadium, and an estimated half billion watching on television.[12]
following an air show by the canadian forces air command's snowbirds aerobatic flight demonstration squadron in the sunny skies above the stadium, the ceremony officially began at 3:00 pm with a trumpet fanfare and the arrival of elizabeth ii, as queen of canada.[13] the queen was accompanied by michael morris, lord killanin, president of the international olympic committee, and was greeted to an orchestral rendition of 'o canada', an arrangement that for many years later would be used in schools across the country as well as in the daily sign off of tv broadcasts in the country.[14]
the queen entered the royal box with her consort, prince philip, duke of edinburgh, and her son, prince andrew. (her daughter, princess anne, was an equestrian competitor for the team from great britain. prince philip was also president of the international equestrian federation (fei) at the time of the 1976 summer olympics.) she joined a number of canadian and olympic dignitaries, including: jules léger, governor general of canada, and his wife, gabrielle; prime minister pierre trudeau and wife, margaret; robert bourassa, premier of the province of quebec; roger rousseau, chief of the montreal olympic organizing committee (cojo); sheila dunlop, lady killanin, wife of the ioc president; mayor of montreal, jean drapeau, and his wife, marie-claire.
the parade of athletes began moments later with the arrival of the greek team and concluded with the entrance of the canadian team. all other teams entered the stadium according to french alphabetical order.  the ceremony was marked by the adorning of israel’s flag with a black mourning ribbon, in memory of the eleven athletes and coaches killed by palestinian terrorists at the previous summer olympic games in munich four years earlier. although most would eventually boycott the games in the days to follow, a number of african delegations did march in the parade. much of the music performed for the parade was arranged by vic vogel and was inspired by late quebec composer, andré mathieu.[15]
immediately following the parade, a troupe of 80 women dancers dressed in white (representing the 80th anniversary of the revival of the olympic games) performed a brief dance in the outline of the olympic rings.
following that came the official speeches, first by roger rousseau, head of the montreal olympic organizing committee, and lord killanin. her majesty was then invited to proclaim the games open, which she did, first in french, then in english.
accompanied by the olympic hymn, the olympic flag was carried into the stadium and hoisted at the west end of the stadium. the flag was carried by eight men and hoisted by four women, representing the ten provinces and two territories (at the time) of canada. as the flag was hoisted, an all-male choir performed an a cappella version of the olympic hymn.
once the flag was unfurled, a troupe of bavarian dancers, representing munich, host of the previous 1972 summer olympics, entered the stadium with the antwerp flag. following a brief dance, that flag was then passed from the mayor of munich to the ioc president and then to the mayor of montreal. next came a presentation of traditional québécois folk dancers. the two troupes merged in dance together to the strains of "vive le compagnie" and exited the stadium with the antwerp flag, which would be displayed at montreal city hall until the opening of the 1980 summer olympics in moscow.
three cannons were then fired, as the 80-member troupe of female dancers unfolded special crates that released doves and ribbons in the five olympic colours.
another trumpet fanfare announced the arrival of the olympic flame. the torch was carried by two 15-year-olds, stéphane préfontaine and sandra henderson, chosen as representatives of the unity within canada's linguistic heritage. this would also be the first time two people would light the olympic flame, and henderson would become only the second woman to do the honours. the duo would make a lap of the stadium and then climbed a staircase on a special dais at the center of the stadium to set the olympic flame alight in a temporary white aluminum cauldron. the flame was later transported to a more permanent cauldron just outside the running track to burn throughout the duration of the games. a choir then performed the olympic cantata as onlookers admired the olympic flame.
then, the 'youth of canada' took to the track to perform a colourful choreographed segment with flags, ribbons and a variety of rhythmic gymnast performers.
the flag bearers of each team then circled around the speaker's dais as pierre st-jean recited the athletes' oath and maurice forget recited the judges' oath, in english and in french, with right hand over the heart and the canadian flag clutched in the left.
finally, a choral performance of 'o canada' in both french and english marked the close of the opening ceremony, as the announcers concluded with a declaration of 'vive les jeux de montreal! long live the montreal games'.
the montreal ceremony would be the last of its kind, as future olympic ceremonies, beginning with the 1980 moscow games, would become more focused on theatrical, cultural and artistic presentations and less on formality and protocol.
there was a desire by the ioc's program commission to reduce the number of competitors and a number of recommendations were put to the ioc's executive board on february 23, 1973, which were all accepted. rowing was the only sport where the number of competitors was increased, and women were admitted for the first time in olympic history. the 1976 summer olympic programme featured 196 events with 198 medal ceremonies in the following 21 sports:[23]
four nations made their first summer olympic appearance in montreal: andorra (which had its overall olympic debut a few months before in innsbruck winter olympics), antigua and barbuda (as antigua), cayman islands, and papua new guinea.
numbers in parentheses indicate the number of athletes from each nation that competed at the games.
^ wd: athletes from cameroon, egypt, morocco and tunisia competed on july 18–20 before these nations withdrew from the games.
^ note: athletes from guyana, mali and swaziland also took part in the opening ceremony, but later joined the congolese-led boycott and withdrew from all competitions.
these are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1976 games. canada placed 27th with only 11 medals in total, none of them being gold. canada remains the only host nation of a summer olympics that did not win at least one gold medal in its own games. it also did not win any gold medals at the 1988 winter olympics in calgary. however, canada went on to win the most gold medals at the 2010 winter olympics in vancouver.
twenty-nine countries boycotted the games[24][25] due to the refusal of the ioc to ban new zealand, after the new zealand national rugby union team had toured south africa earlier in 1976.[26] the boycott was led by congolese official jean claude ganga [fr]. some of the boycotting nations (including morocco, cameroon and egypt) had already participated, however, and withdrew after the first few days. senegal and ivory coast were the only african countries that competed throughout the duration of the games. elsewhere, both iraq and guyana also opted to join the congolese-led boycott. south africa had been banned from the olympics since 1964 due to its apartheid policies. other countries, such as el salvador and zaire, did not participate in montreal for purely economic reasons.[24]
an unrelated boycott of the montreal games was the main issue between the republic of china (roc) and the people's republic of china (prc). the roc team withdrew from the games when canada's liberal government under pierre trudeau told it that the name "republic of china" was not permissible at the games because canada had officially recognized the prc in 1970. canada attempted a compromise by allowing the roc the continued use of its national flag and anthem in the montreal olympic activities; the roc refused. later in november 1976, the ioc recognized the prc as the only recognized name of any olympic activities representative of any chinese government. in 1979 the ioc established in the nagoya resolution that the prc agreed to participate in ioc activities if the republic of china was referred to as "chinese taipei". another boycott would occur before the roc would accept the provisions of the 1979 resolution although the reason that so many other countries boycotted were not all the same as the roc.
the legacy of the montreal olympics is complex. many citizens regard the olympiad as a financial disaster for the city as it faced debts for 30 years after the games had finished. the retractable roof of the olympic stadium never properly worked and on several occasions has torn, prompting the stadium to be closed for extended periods of time for repairs. the failure of the montreal expos baseball club is largely blamed on the failure of the olympic stadium to transition into an effective and popular venue for the club – given the massive capacity of the stadium, it often looked unimpressive even with regular crowds in excess of 20,000 spectators.
the year 1976 was also when the separatist parti québécois was first elected in quebec, leading to new legislation to strengthen the legal status of the province's french-speaking majority; this also had the effect of driving migration of english speakers out of the province, especially to ontario.
montreal's economy was also changing much like other industrial cities in the great lakes and saint lawrence river region of north america. in sum, numerous political, socio-cultural and economic changes affected the city at around the same time as the olympics that would result in stalled growth and give the appearance of decline. that said, many of these factors existed prior to the olympics and continued to have an effect on montreal's growth and relative importance many years afterwards. there is no evidence which definitively proves that the montreal olympics played a specific role in that decline.
before the 21st century, the relative benefits of the olympics were defined differently. there were also different methods by which they were financed and presented to the public.
the quebec provincial government took over construction when it became evident in 1975 that work had fallen far behind schedule. work was still ongoing just weeks before the opening date, and the tower was not built. mayor jean drapeau had confidently predicted in 1970 that "the olympics can no more have a deficit than a man can have a baby", but the debt racked up to a billion dollars that the quebec government mandated the city pay in full. this would prompt cartoonist aislin to draw a pregnant drapeau on the telephone saying, "allo, morgentaler?" in reference to a montreal abortion provider.[27]
the olympic stadium was designed by french architect roger taillibert. it is often nicknamed "the big o" as a reference to both its name and to the doughnut-shape of the permanent component of the stadium's roof, though "the big owe" has been used to reference the astronomical cost of the stadium and the 1976 olympics as a whole. it has never had an effective retractable roof, and the tower (called the montreal tower) was completed only after the olympic games were over. in december 2006 the stadium's costs were finally paid in full.[28] the total expenditure (including repairs, renovations, construction, interest, and inflation) amounted to c$1.61 billion. today the stadium lacks a permanent tenant, as the montreal alouettes and montreal expos have moved, though it does host some individual games of the alouettes as well as the montreal impact.
one of the streets surrounding the olympic stadium was renamed to honor pierre de coubertin, the founder of the olympics.
the boycott by african nations over the inclusion of new zealand, whose rugby team had played in south africa that year, was a contributing factor in the massive protests and civil disobedience that occurred during the 1981 springbok tour of new zealand. official sporting contacts between south africa and new zealand did not occur again until after the fall of apartheid.
australia's failure to win a gold medal led the country to create the australian institute of sport.
in 2016, the 40th anniversary celebrations were held. in conjunction with the celebrations, the 2016 quebec games were held.[29]
video clips

the 1980 summer olympics, officially known as the games of the xxii olympiad (russian: и́гры xxii олимпиа́ды, tr. igry xxii olimpiady), was an international multi-sport event held in moscow, soviet union, in present-day russia.[2][3]
the 1980 games were the first olympic games to be staged in eastern europe, and remain the only summer olympics held there, as well as the first olympic games to be held in a slavic language-speaking country. they were also the first olympic games to be held in a communist country until 2008 in china. these were the final olympic games under the ioc presidency of michael morris, 3rd baron killanin.
eighty nations were represented at the moscow games – the smallest number since 1956. led by the united states, 66 countries boycotted the games entirely because of the soviet–afghan war. some athletes from some of the boycotting countries (they are not included in the list of 66 countries that boycotted the games entirely) participated in the games under the olympic flag.[4] the soviet union would later boycott the 1984 summer olympics. the soviet union won the most gold and overall medals, with the ussr and east germany winning 127 out of 204 available golds.
the only two cities to bid for the 1980 summer olympics were moscow and los angeles. the choice between them was made on 23 october 1974 in the 75th ioc session in vienna, austria. los angeles would eventually host the 1984 summer olympics.[5]
eighty nations were represented at the moscow games – the smallest number since 1956. of the eighty participating nations,[6] seven nations made their first appearance at this games – angola, botswana, cyprus, jordan, laos, mozambique and seychelles.[7] none of these nations won a medal.
although approximately half of the 24 countries that boycotted the 1976 summer olympics (in protest against the ioc not expelling new zealand who sanctioned a rugby tour of apartheid south africa) participated in the moscow games, the 1980 summer olympics were disrupted by another, even larger, boycott led by the united states in protest at the 1979 soviet–afghan war. the soviet invasion spurred jimmy carter to issue an ultimatum on 20 january 1980, that the us would boycott the moscow olympics if soviet troops did not withdraw from afghanistan within one month.[8] 65 countries and regions invited did not take part in the 1980 olympics. many of these followed the united states' boycott initiative, while others[who?] cited economic reasons for not coming.[8][9] iran, under ayatollah khomeini hostile to both superpowers, boycotted when the islamic conference condemned the invasion.[10]
many of the boycotting nations participated instead in the liberty bell classic, also known as the "olympic boycott games", in philadelphia. however, the nations that did compete had won 71 percent of all medals, and similarly 71 percent of the gold medals, at the 1976 summer olympics in montreal. this was in part because of state-run doping programs that had been developed in the eastern bloc countries.[11] as a form of protest against the soviet intervention in afghanistan, fifteen countries marched in the opening ceremony with the olympic flag instead of their national flags, and the olympic flag and olympic hymn were used at medal ceremonies when athletes from these countries won medals. competitors from three countries – new zealand,[12] portugal, and spain – competed under the flags of their respective national olympic committees. some of these teams that marched under flags other than their national flags were depleted by boycotts by individual athletes, while some athletes did not participate in the march.[citation needed]
the impact of the boycott was mixed. some events, such as swimming, track and field, boxing, basketball, diving, field hockey and equestrian sports, were hard hit. whilst competitors from 36 countries became olympic medalists, the great majority of the medals were taken by the host country and east germany in what was the most skewed medal tally since 1904.[13]
there were 203 events – more than at any previous olympics.
36 world records, 39 european records and 74 olympic records were set at the games. in total, this was more records than were set at montreal. new olympic records were set 241 times over the course of the competitions and world records were beaten 97 times.
a 1989 report by a committee of the australian senate claimed that "there is hardly a medal winner at the moscow games, certainly not a gold medal winner...who is not on one sort of drug or another: usually several kinds. the moscow games might well have been called the chemists' games".[14]
a member of the ioc medical commission, manfred donike, privately ran additional tests with a new technique for identifying abnormal levels of testosterone by measuring its ratio to epitestosterone in urine. twenty percent of the specimens he tested, including those from sixteen gold medalists would have resulted in disciplinary proceedings had the tests been official. the results of donike's unofficial tests later convinced the ioc to add his new technique to their testing protocols.[15] the first documented case of "blood doping" occurred at the 1980 summer olympics as a runner was transfused with two pints of blood before winning medals in the 5000 m and 10,000 m.[16]
major broadcasters of the games were ussr state tv and radio (1,370 accreditation cards), eurovision (31 countries, 818 cards) and intervision (11 countries, 342 cards).[17] tv asahi with 68 cards provided coverage for japan, while oti representing latin america received 59 cards and the seven network provided coverage for australia (48 cards).[17] nbc, which had intended to be another major broadcaster, canceled its coverage in response to the u.s. boycott of the 1980 summer olympics, and became a minor broadcaster with 56 accreditation cards,[17] although the network did air highlights and recaps of the games on a regular basis. (abc aired scenes of the opening ceremony during its nightline program, and promised highlights each night, but the next night, the show announced that they could not air any highlights as nbc still had exclusive broadcast rights in the usa). the canadian broadcasting corporation almost canceled their plans for coverage after canada took part in the boycott and was represented by nine cards.[17] the television center used 20 television channels, compared to 16 for the montreal games, 12 for the munich games, and seven for the mexico city games.
during the opening ceremony, salyut 6 crew leonid popov and valery ryumin sent their greetings to the olympians and wished them happy starts in the live communication between the station and the central lenin stadium. they appeared on the stadium's scoreboard and their voices were translated via loud speakers.[18]
the games attracted five million spectators, an increase of 1.5 million from the montreal games. there were 1,245 referees from 78 countries.[citation needed] a series of commemorative coins was released in the ussr in 1977–1980 to commemorate the event. it consisted of five platinum coins, six gold coins, 28 silver coins and six copper-nickel coins.[citation needed]
according to the official report, submitted to the ioc by the noc of the ussr, total expenditures for the preparations for and staging of the games were us$1,350,000,000,[19] total revenues being us$231,000,000.[19]
the oxford olympics study established the outturn cost of the moscow 1980 summer olympics at us$6.3 billion in 2015 dollars.[20] this includes sports-related costs only, that is, (i) operational costs incurred by the organizing committee for the purpose of staging the games, e.g., expenditures for technology, transportation, workforce, administration, security, catering, ceremonies, and medical services, and (ii) direct capital costs incurred by the host city and country or private investors to build, e.g., the competition venues, the olympic village, international broadcast center, and media and press center, which are required to host the games. indirect capital costs are not included, such as for road, rail, or airport infrastructure, or for hotel upgrades or other business investment incurred in preparation for the games but not directly related to staging the games. the cost for moscow 1980 compares with costs of us$4.6 billion for rio 2016 (projected), us$6.8 billion for beijing 2008 and us$21.9 billion for sochi 2014, the most expensive olympics in history. average cost for the summer games since 1960 is us$5.2 billion.
because of the u.s. boycott, changes were made to the traditional elements of the closing ceremony that represent the handover to the host city of the next summer olympics in los angeles. among them, the flag of the city of los angeles instead of the united states flag was raised, and the olympic anthem instead of the national anthem of the united states was played. there was also no "antwerp ceremony", where the ceremonial olympic flag was transferred from the mayor of moscow to the mayor of los angeles; instead the flag was kept by the moscow city authorities until 1984. furthermore, there was no next host city presentation.
both the opening and closing ceremonies were shown in yuri ozerov's 1981 film oh, sport – you are the world! (russian: о спорт, ты – мир!).
¹ new facilities constructed in preparation for the olympic games.
² existing facilities modified or refurbished in preparation for the olympic games.
the 1980 summer olympic programme featured 203 events in the following 21 sports:




this is a list of all nations that won medals at the 1980 games.
  *   host nation (soviet union)in the following list, the number in parentheses indicates the number of athletes from each nation that competed in moscow. nations in italics competed under the olympic flag (or, in the cases of new zealand, portugal and spain, under the flags of their respective national olympic committees):
^ note:  liberia with seven athletes, withdrew after marching in the opening ceremony and took part in the boycott.

the 1984 summer olympics, officially known as the games of the xxiii olympiad, was an international multi-sport event that was held from july 28 to august 12, 1984, in los angeles, united states (and other venues around the united states). this was the second time that los angeles had hosted the games, the first being in 1932.
california was the home state of then-u.s. president ronald reagan, who officially opened the games. the logo for the 1984 games, branded "stars in motion", featured red, white and blue stars arranged horizontally and struck through with alternating streaks.
the official mascot of the games was sam the olympic eagle. these were the first summer olympic games under the ioc presidency of juan antonio samaranch.
the 1984 games were boycotted by a total of fourteen eastern bloc countries, including the soviet union and east germany, in response to the american-led boycott of the previous 1980 summer olympics in moscow in protest of the soviet invasion of afghanistan; romania was the only eastern bloc nation that opted to attend the games. iran and libya also chose to boycott the games for unrelated reasons. despite the field being depleted in certain sports due to the boycott, 140 national olympic committees took part, which was a record at the time.[2][3] the united states won the most gold and overall medals, followed by romania and west germany.
the 1984 summer olympics are widely considered to be the most financially successful modern olympics[4] and served as an example of how to run the model olympic games. as a result of low construction costs, coupled with a reliance on private corporate funding,[5] the 1984 olympic games generated a profit of more than $250 million.
on july 18, 2009, a 25th anniversary celebration was held in the main olympic stadium. the celebration included a speech by the former president of the los angeles olympic organizing committee, peter ueberroth, and a re-creation of the lighting of the cauldron. los angeles will host the summer olympics for the third time in 2028.
after the murder of israeli athletes by palestinian terrorists in munich (1972), the significant financial debts of montreal (1976), and boycotts, few cities by the late 1970s were willing to bid for the summer olympics. only two cities (tehran and los angeles) made serious bids for the 1984 summer games, but before the final selection of a "winning" city in 1978, the bid from tehran was withdrawn as a result of iran's policy changes following the iranian revolution and a change in the country's ruling system. hence, the selection process for the 1984 summer olympics consisted of a single finalized bid from los angeles, which the international olympic committee (ioc) accepted.  the selection was officially made at the 80th ioc session in athens on 18 may 1978.[6]
los angeles had unsuccessfully bid for the two previous summer olympics, for 1976 and 1980. the united states olympic committee (usoc) had submitted at least one bid for every olympics since 1944, but had not succeeded since the los angeles olympics in 1932, the previous time only a single bid had been issued for the summer olympics.
the 1984 olympic torch relay began in new york city and ended in los angeles, traversing 33 states and the district of columbia. unlike later torch relays, the torch was continuously carried by runners on foot. the route covered more than 9,320 mi (15,000 km) and involved 3,636 runners. noted athlete o.j. simpson was among the runners, carrying the torch up the california incline in santa monica. gina hemphill, granddaughter of jesse owens, carried the torch into the coliseum, completed a lap around the track, then handed it off to the final runner, rafer johnson, winner of the decathlon at the 1960 summer olympics. with the torch, he touched off the flame which passed through a specially designed flammable olympic logo, igniting all five rings. the flame then passed up to cauldron atop the peristyle and remained aflame for the duration of the games.
john williams composed the theme for the olympiad, "olympic fanfare and theme". this piece won a grammy for williams and became one of the most well-known musical themes of the olympic games, along with leo arnaud's "bugler's dream"; the latter is sometimes attached to the beginning of olympic fanfare and theme. composer bill conti also wrote a song to inspire the weightlifters called "power". an album, the official music of the xxiii olympiad—los angeles 1984, featured three of those tracks along with sports themes written for the occasion by popular musical artists including foreigner, toto, loverboy, herbie hancock, quincy jones, christopher cross, philip glass and giorgio moroder.[7]
the brazilian composer sérgio mendes also produced a special song for the 1984 olympic games, "olympia," from his 1984 album confetti. a choir of approximately one thousand voices was assembled of singers in the region. all were volunteers from nearby churches, schools and universities.
etta james performed "when the saints go marching in" at the opening ceremony.[8]
vicki mcclure along with the international children's choir of long beach sang "reach out and touch".
lionel richie performed a 9-minute version of his hit single "all night long" at the closing ceremonies.[9]
the 1984 summer olympics was preceded by the 10-week-long adjunct los angeles olympic arts festival, which opened on june 2 and ended on august 12. it provided more than 400 performances by 146 theater, dance and music companies, representing every continent and 18 countries. it was organized by then-calarts president robert fitzpatrick.
the los angeles olympic organizing committee named ernie barnes "sports artist of the 1984 olympic games". laooc president peter v. ueberroth said barnes and his art "captured the essence of the olympics" and "portray the city's ethnic diversity, the power and emotion of sports competition, the singleness of purpose and hopes that go into the making of athletes the world over." barnes was commissioned to create five olympic-themed paintings and serve as an official olympic spokesman to encourage inner city youth.[
the oxford olympics study established the outturn cost of the los angeles 1984 summer olympics at us$719 million in 2015-dollars.[13] this includes sports-related costs only, that is, (i) operational costs incurred by the organizing committee for the purpose of staging the games, e.g., expenditures for technology, transportation, workforce, administration, security, catering, ceremonies, and medical services, and (ii) direct capital costs incurred by the host city and country or private investors to build, e.g., the competition venues, the olympic village, international broadcast center, and media and press center, which are required to host the games. indirect capital costs are not included, such as for road, rail, or airport infrastructure, or for hotel upgrades or other business investment incurred in preparation for the games but not directly related to staging the games. the cost for los angeles 1984 compares with costs of us$4.6 billion for rio 2016, us$40-44 billion for beijing 2008 and us$51 billion for sochi 2014, the most expensive olympics in history. average cost for the summer games since 1960 is us$5.2 billion.
the 1984 summer olympic program featured 221 events in the following 21 sports:




these are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1984 games.
athletes from 140 nations competed at the 1984 summer olympics. eighteen nations made their olympic debut: bahrain, bangladesh, bhutan, british virgin islands, djibouti, equatorial guinea, gambia, grenada, mauritania, mauritius, north yemen, oman, qatar, rwanda, samoa, solomon islands, tonga, and the united arab emirates. zaire had previously competed at the 1968 summer olympics as congo-kinshasa. the people's republic of china made its first appearance in a summer olympics since 1952, while for the first time the republic of china team participated under the politically contrived name of chinese taipei.
the soviet union led the warsaw pact members and other communist countries in a boycott of the los angeles olympics, in retaliation for the u.s.-led boycott of the moscow olympics four years earlier (over the soviet union's invasion of afghanistan in 1979). the pretexts for the 1984 soviet-led boycott were concerns over security, "chauvinistic sentiments" and "an anti-soviet hysteria ... being whipped up" in the united states.[14] however, a handful of countries disregarded the boycott and attended the games anyway, among them yugoslavia (host of the 1984 winter olympics), the people's republic of china, and romania (the only warsaw pact country that had opted to ignore the soviet demands). the romanian team received a particularly warm reception from the united states; when the romanian athletes entered during the opening ceremonies, they were greeted by a standing ovation from the spectators, who were mostly u.s. citizens. this would turn out to be romania's most successful olympic games – they won 53 medals, including 20 golds.
in the table below, the number of athletes representing each nation is shown in parentheses.
fourteen countries took part in the soviet-led boycott of the 1984 summer olympics:[15]
albania, iran and libya also boycotted the los angeles olympics, citing political reasons, but these countries were not a part of the soviet-led boycott. albania and iran were the only two countries to boycott both the 1980 and 1984 summer games.
documents obtained in 2016 revealed the soviet union's plans for a statewide doping system in track and field in preparation for the 1984 summer olympics in los angeles. dated prior to the country's decision to boycott the games, the document detailed the existing steroids operations of the program, along with suggestions for further enhancements. the communication, directed to the soviet union's head of track and field, was prepared by dr. sergei portugalov of the institute for physical culture. portugalov was also one of the main figures involved in the implementation of the russian doping program prior to the 2016 summer olympics.[12] filmmaker and director of 2017 movie icarus bryan fogel has said that stricter doping controls might have been the main reason of the soviet boycott.[16]
following the news of the massive financial losses of the 1976 summer olympics in montreal, the only two cities to express a genuine interest in hosting the 1984 games were los angeles and new york. given that only one city per country is allowed to bid for any one games, the usoc vote for the american bid city was effectively the deciding vote for the 1984 olympics host city. in this case, the los angeles bid received 55 votes compared with new york's 39 votes – this is the closest that the city of new york has ever come to being selected to host the olympic games, coming closer in 1984 than they did in their 2012 bid (when they lost to london).[17]
the low level of interest among potential host cities for the 1984 games had been viewed as a major threat to the future of the olympic games. however, after the financial success of the los angeles games, cities began to show a renewed interest in bidding to become host again. the los angeles and montreal games are seen as examples of best and worst practice when organizing the olympics, and serve as valuable lessons to prospective host cities.
ambitious construction projects for the two previous summer olympics, montreal 1976 and moscow 1980, had burdened organizers with substantial debts as expenses greatly exceeded revenues. furthermore, the 1976 and 1980 olympics were entirely government funded. unlike montreal and moscow, los angeles 1984 was privately funded, with strict controls imposed on expenditure; rather than constructing new venues with overly ambitious designs, the organizers chose instead to utilise existing venues and facilities wherever possible. the main example of this was the los angeles memorial coliseum, which was also the olympic stadium for the 1932 summer olympics.[18] the only two new venues constructed specifically for the 1984 summer olympics were secured with the backing of corporate sponsors: the olympic velodrome was largely funded by the 7-eleven corporation and the olympic swim stadium by mcdonald's.
in addition to corporate support, the olympic committee also used the income from the exclusive television rights, and for the first time these contracts would prove to be a significant source of revenue. adjusted for inflation, the los angeles games secured twice the amount of income received by the 1980 moscow summer olympics and four times that of the 1976 montreal summer olympics.[19][17]
following the success of the 1984 games, the los angeles ocog, led by peter ueberroth, used the profits to create the la84 foundation for promoting youth sports in southern california, educating coaches and maintaining a sports library.
the games were the topic of the 1983–84 united states commemorative coin series.
mcdonald's ran a promotion titled, "when the u.s. wins, you win" where customers scratched off a ticket with the name of an olympic event on it, and if the u.s. won a medal in that event then they would be given a free menu item: a big mac for a gold medal, an order of french fries for a silver medal, and a coca-cola for a bronze medal. the promotion became more popular than expected due to the soviet boycott which led to the u.s. winning far more olympic medals than expected.[20]
this promotion was parodied in the simpsons episode "lisa's first word", where krusty burger runs a similar offer. the promotion was intended to be rigged so that prizes would only be offered in events dominated by the eastern bloc, but the soviet-led boycott causes krusty to personally lose $44 million. he vehemently promises "to spit in every fiftieth burger," to which homer retorts "i like those odds!" chief wiggum also exclaims that he could kiss carl lewis, who won four gold medals at the games.
on ncis, tim mcgee has an obsession with jet packs, stemming from having attended the 1984 olympic ceremony as a child and having bill suitor fly over his head in his jet pack.[21] this storyline is based on the real experience of executive producer and writer jesse stern.[22]
pop punk band bowling for soup references the games in the song "i can't stand la". during a section showing appreciation for the city, the song states, "thank you for hair metal and the '84 olympics."
jilly cooper's novel riders has a storyline set at the show jumping event at the 1984 summer olympics.
in the seinfeld episode "the gymnast", jerry dates a woman who competed in the 1984 olympics and won a silver medal for romania.
the 1984 games were covered by the following broadcasters:

the 1988 summer olympics (korean: 서울 하계 올림픽; rr: seoul hagye ollimpik [sʌ.ul ɦaɡje olːimpʰik]), officially known as the games of the xxiv olympiad, was an international multi-sport event celebrated from 17 september to 2 october 1988 in seoul, south korea.
in the seoul games, 159 nations were represented by a total of 8,391 athletes: 6,197 men and 2,194 women. 237 events were held and 27,221 volunteers helped to prepare the olympics. 11,331 media (4,978 written press and 6,353 broadcasters) showed the games all over the world.[3]
these were the last olympic games for the soviet union and east germany, as both ceased to exist before the next olympic games. the soviets utterly dominated the medal table, winning 55 gold and 132 total medals. no country came close to this result after 1988.
the games were boycotted by north korea and its ally, cuba. ethiopia, albania and the seychelles did not respond to the invitations sent by the ioc.[4] nicaragua did not participate due to athletic and financial considerations.[5] the participation of madagascar had been expected, and their team was expected at the opening ceremony of 160 nations. however, the country withdrew because of financial reasons.[6] nonetheless, the much larger boycotts seen in the previous three summer olympics (1976, 1980 and 1984) were avoided, resulting in the largest number of participating nations during the cold war era.
seoul was chosen to host the summer games through a vote held on 30 september 1981, finishing ahead of the japanese city of nagoya.[3][7] below was the vote count that occurred at the 84th ioc session and 11th olympic congress in baden-baden, west germany.[8]
after the olympics were awarded, seoul also received the opportunity to stage the 10th asian games in 1986, using them to test its preparation for the olympics.
live doves were released during the opening ceremony as a symbol of world peace, but a number of the doves were burned alive or suffered major trauma by the lighting of the olympic cauldron. as a result of protests following the incident, the last time live doves were released at the opening ceremony was in 1992 in barcelona, hours before the flame was lit. balloon doves were released in 1994 at the lillehammer winter games and paper doves were used at the atlanta ceremony in 1996.[39]
these were also the last summer olympic games to hold the opening ceremony during the daytime. the opening ceremony featured a skydiving team descending over the stadium and forming the five-colored olympic rings,[40] as well as a mass demonstration of taekwondo. the skydiving team trained at skydance skydiving and had hoped the opening ceremony appearance would set the stage for skydiving becoming a medal event by 2000.[41]
hosting the 1988 olympics presented an opportunity to bring international attention to south korea.[42] the idea for south korea to place a bid for the 1988 games emerged during the last days of the park chung-hee administration in the late 1970s.  after president park's assassination in 1979, chun doo-hwan, his successor, submitted korea's bid to the ioc in september 1981, in hopes that the increased international exposure brought by the olympics would legitimize his authoritarian regime amidst increasing political pressure for democratization, provide protection from increasing threats from north korea, and showcase the korean economic miracle to the world community.[43] south korea was awarded the bid on 30 september 1981, becoming the 20th host nation (16th in the summer olympics), as well as the second asian nation (following japan in the 1964 summer olympics) and the first mainland asian nation.
copying the model of 1964 tokyo olympics as a rite of passage for the japanese economy and re-integration of japan in the family of nations in the post-war era, the south korean government hoped to use the olympics as a "coming-out party".  the olympics gave a powerful impetus to the development of south korea's relations with eastern europe, the soviet union and with china.[44]
in utilizing media events theory, larson and park investigated the 1988 seoul olympics as a form of political communication. they revealed the significance of south korea's military government throughout the period of the olympic bid and preparation, followed by the many advantages of the seoul olympics: rapid economic modernization, social mobilization and the legitimization of the military dictatorship.[45]
existing camps for "vagrants" (homeless persons) were ramped up prior to the 1988 olympics. an associated press article states that homeless and alcoholic persons, "but mostly children and the disabled" were arrested and sent to these camps to prepare for the olympics. in addition, a prosecutor had his investigation into the brothers home camp limited at a number of levels of government "in part out of fear of an embarrassing international incident on the eve of the olympics."[46]
in 1975, the previous president of south korea had begun a policy of rounding up vagrants.  according to government documents obtained by the associated press, from 1981 to 1986 the number of persons held increased from 8,600 to more than 16,000. police officers often received promotions based on the number of vagrants they had arrested, and owners of facilities received a subsidy based on the number of persons held. there were multiple reports of inmates being raped or beaten, and sometimes beaten to death.[46]
4,000 of these "vagrants" were held at the brothers home facility. many of the guards were former inmates who had been "promoted" because of loyalty to the camp's owner. various money-making operations were conducted such as manufacturing ball-point pens and fishing hooks, as well as clothing for daewoo. only a few inmates were paid belatedly for this work.[46]
by accident while on a hunting trip, prosecutor kim yong-won heard about and visited a work detail of prisoners in ragged clothes being overseen by guards with wooden bats and dogs. in his words, he knew immediately that "a very serious crime" was occurring. and in january 1987, he led a raid on the facility and found beaten and malnourished inmates. however, he received political pressure at various levels to reduce the charges against the owner, managers, and guards. in the end, the owner only served two-and-a-half years in prison.[46]
the brothers home was a religious facility based on the christian faith. there were in fact inspections by both city officials and church officials. however, these were scheduled inspections in which healthier inmates were presented in carefully planned and orchestrated circumstances. there were no unannounced inspections.[46]
in the 1990s, construction workers found about 100 human bones on a mountainside outside the location of the former brothers home.[46]
in preparation for the 1988 olympics, the international olympic committee worked to prevent another olympic boycott by the eastern bloc as had happened at the 1984 summer olympics in los angeles. this was made more difficult by the lack of diplomatic relations between south korea and communist countries. this prompted action by the ioc president juan antonio samaranch, who was committed to the participation of these countries. thus, at the assembly of national olympic committees in mexico city in november 1984, the "mexico declaration" [1] was adopted; by it, the participants agreed to include the host of the olympic games in 1988.[clarification needed] the agreement of the soviet union was reached in 1987. after the los angeles games, east germany had already decided to participate again in seoul. the ioc also decided that it would send invitations to the 1988 games itself and did not leave this task to the organizing committee as had been done before. despite these developments, behind the scenes, the ioc did consider relocating the games and explored the suitability of munich as an alternative.
another point of conflict was the involvement of north korea in hosting the games, something that had been encouraged by cuban president fidel castro, who called for north korea to be considered joint host of the games. as a result, on 8 and 9 january 1986 in lausanne, switzerland, the ioc president chaired a meeting of the north and south korean olympic committees. north korea demanded that eleven of the 23 olympic sports be carried out on its territory, and also demanded special opening and closing ceremonies. it wanted a joint organizing committee and a united team. the negotiations were continued into another meeting, but were not successful. the ioc did not meet the demands of north korea and only about half of the desired sporting events were offered to the north. so the focus thereafter was solely on seoul and south korea.[47]
the games were boycotted by north korea and its ally, cuba. ethiopia, albania and the seychelles did not respond to the invitations sent by the ioc.[4] nicaragua did not participate due to athletic and financial considerations.[5] the participation of madagascar had been expected, and their team was expected at the opening ceremony of 160 nations. however, the country withdrew for financial reasons.[6]
in 1988, the seoul olympic organizing committee (slooc) decided to produce and distribute an official song of the seoul games to publicize the games to all the ioc member nations, encouraging their participation in the festival and
consolidating the harmony and friendship of the entire world citizens through the song. the song "hand in hand" was written by italian composer giorgio moroder and american songwriter tom whitlock, and performed by singing group koreana.

e  existing facilities modified or refurbished in preparation for the olympic games.
n  new facilities constructed in preparation for the olympic games.

according to the oxford olympics study data is not available to establish the cost of the seoul 1988 summer olympics.[48] average cost for summer games since 1960, for which data is available, is us$5.2 billion.
the 1988 summer olympics featured 23 different sports encompassing 31 disciplines, and medals were awarded in 237 events. in the list below, the number of events in each discipline is noted in parentheses.




these were the demonstration sports in the games:[3]
athletes from 159 nations competed at the seoul games.  aruba, american samoa, brunei, cook islands, maldives, vanuatu, saint vincent and the grenadines, and south yemen made their first olympic appearance at these games. guam made their first summer olympic appearance at these games having participated in the 1988 winter olympics in calgary.
in the following list, the number in parentheses indicates the number of athletes from each nation that competed in seoul:[49]
^ note: brunei participated in the opening ceremonies and closing ceremonies, marking its first appearance at the olympic games, but its delegation consisted of only one swimming official.
these are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1988 games.
  *   host nation (south korea)
the official mascot for the 1988 summer olympic games was hodori. it was a stylized tiger designed by kim hyun as an amicable amur tiger, portraying the friendly and hospitable traditions of the korean people.[51] hodori's female version was called hosuni.[52]
the name 호돌이 hodori was chosen from 2,295 suggestions sent in by the public. it is a compound of 호 ho, the sino-korean bound morpheme for "tiger" (appearing also in the usual word 호랑이 horangi for "tiger"), and 돌이 dori, a diminutive for "boys".[51]
the 1988 games were covered by the following broadcasters:


the 1992 summer olympics (spanish: juegos olímpicos de verano de 1992; catalan: jocs olímpics d'estiu de 1992), officially known as the games of the xxv olympiad, was an international multi-sport event held in barcelona, spain from 25 july to 9 august 1992.
beginning in 1994, the international olympic committee decided to hold the summer and winter olympics in alternating even-numbered years. the 1992 summer olympics was the last occasion for the summer and winter olympics to be staged in the same year.[2] this olympiad was the first since the end of the cold war, and was unaffected by boycotts for the first time since the 1972 olympiad.[3]
the unified team topped the medal table, winning 45 gold and 112 overall medals.
barcelona is the second-largest city in spain, and the hometown of then-ioc president juan antonio samaranch. the city was also a host for the 1982 fifa world cup. on 17 october 1986, barcelona was selected to host the 1992 summer olympics over amsterdam, the netherlands; belgrade, yugoslavia; birmingham, uk; brisbane, australia; and paris, france, during the 91st ioc session in lausanne, switzerland.[4]  with 85 out of 89 members of the ioc voting by secret ballot, barcelona won a majority of 47 votes.  samaranch abstained from voting.  in the same ioc meeting, albertville, france, won the right to host the 1992 winter games.[5]
barcelona had previously bid for the 1936 summer olympics, that were held in berlin.
the 1992 summer olympic programme featured 257 events in the following 25 sports:




a total of 169 nations sent athletes to compete in the 1992 summer games.
with the dissolution of the soviet union, twelve of the fifteen new states chose to form a unified team, while the baltic states of estonia, latvia and lithuania each entered their own teams for the first time since 1936. for the first time, croatia, slovenia and bosnia-herzegovina competed as independent nations after their separation from socialist yugoslavia, and namibia and the unified team of yemen (previously north and south yemen) also made their olympic debuts.
the 1992 summer olympics notably marked germany competing as a unified team for the first time since 1964, while south africa returned to the games for the first time in 32 years.
the federal republic of yugoslavia was banned due to un sanctions, but individual yugoslav athletes were allowed to take part as independent olympic participants. four national olympic committees did not send any athletes to compete: afghanistan, brunei, liberia and somalia.
the following table reflects the top ten nations in terms of total medals won at the 1992 games (the host nation is highlighted).
the 1992 summer olympics were covered by the following television and radio broadcasters:[20]
the basque nationalist group eta attempted to disrupt the barcelona games with terrorist attacks. it was already feared beforehand that eta would use the olympics to gain publicity for their cause in front of a worldwide audience.[21] as the time of the games approached,[22] eta committed attacks in barcelona and the catalonia region as a whole, including the deadly 1991 vic bombing.[23][24] on 10 july 1992, the group offered a two-month truce covering the olympics in exchange for negotiations, which the spanish government rejected.[25] however, the games went ahead successfully without an attack.[26]
the celebration of the 1992 olympic games had an enormous impact on the urban culture and outward projection of barcelona. the games provided billions of dollars for infrastructure investments, which are considered to have improved the quality of life in the city, and its attraction for investment and tourism.[27] barcelona became one of the most visited cities in europe after paris, london, and rome.[28][29]
barcelona's nomination for the 1992 summer olympics sparked the implementation of an ambitious plan for urban transformation that had already been developed previously.[30] barcelona was opened to the sea with the construction of the olympic village and olympic port in poblenou. new centres were created, and modern sports facilities were built in the olympic zones of montjuïc, diagonal, and vall d'hebron; hotels were also refurbished and new ones built. the construction of ring roads around the city helped to reduce traffic density, and el prat airport was modernized and expanded with the opening of two new terminals.[31]
the oxford olympics study[32] estimates the direct costs of the barcelona 1992 summer olympics to be us$9.7 billion (expressed in 2015 u.s. dollars) with a cost overrun of 266%. this includes only sports-related costs, that is: (i) operational costs incurred by the organizing committee for the purpose of staging the games, e.g., expenditures for technology, direct transportation, workforce, administration, security, catering, ceremonies, and medical services; and (ii) direct capital costs incurred by the host city and country or private investors to build the competition venues, the olympic village, international broadcast center, media and press center, and similar structures required to host the games. costs excluded from the study are indirect capital and infrastructure costs, such as for road, rail, or airport infrastructure, or for hotel upgrades or other business investment incurred in preparation for the games.[32][33]
the costs for barcelona 1992 may be compared with those of london 2012, which cost us$15 billion with a cost overrun of 76%, and those of rio 2016 which cost us$4.6 billion with a cost overrun of 51%. the average cost for the summer olympics since 1960 is us$5.2 billion, with an average cost overrun of 176%.[32][33]
there were two main musical themes for the 1992 games. the first one was "barcelona", a classical crossover song composed five years earlier by freddie mercury and mike moran; mercury was an admirer of lyric soprano montserrat caballé, both recorded the official theme as a duet. due to mercury's death eight months earlier, the duo was unable to perform the song together during the opening ceremony. a recording of the song instead played over a travelogue of the city at the start of the opening ceremony, seconds before the official countdown.[34][35]  
"amigos para siempre" (friends for life) was the other musical theme. it was written by andrew lloyd webber and don black, and sung by sarah brightman and josé carreras during the closing ceremonies.
ryuichi sakamoto composed and conducted the opening ceremony musical score.[36] the opening olympic fanfare was composed by angelo badalamenti and with orchestrations by joseph turrin.
the official mascot was cobi, a catalan sheepdog in cubist style designed by javier mariscal.[37]
a renewal in barcelona's image and corporate identity could be seen in the publication of posters, commemorative coins, stamps minted by the fnmt in madrid, and the barcelona 1992 olympic official commemorative medals, designed and struck in barcelona.
coordinates: 41°21′51″n 2°09′08″e﻿ / ﻿41.36417°n 2.15222°e﻿ / 41.36417; 2.15222

the 1996 summer olympics, officially known as the games of the xxvi olympiad, commonly known as atlanta 1996, and also referred to as the centennial olympic games,[2][3][4] were an international multi-sport event that was held from july 19 to august 4, 1996, in atlanta, georgia, u.s. these games, which were the fourth summer olympics to be hosted by the united states, marked the centennial of the 1896 summer olympics in athens—the inaugural edition of the modern olympic games. they were also the first since 1924 to be held in a different year from a winter olympics, under a new  ioc practice implemented in 1994 to hold the summer and winter games in alternating, even-numbered years.
more than 10,000 athletes from 197 national olympic committees competed in 26 sports, including the olympic debuts of beach volleyball, mountain biking, and softball, as well as the new disciplines of lightweight rowing and women's football (soccer). 24 countries made their summer olympic debut in atlanta, including eleven former soviet republics participating for the first time as independent nations. the hosting united states led the medal count with a total of 101 medals, and the most gold (44) and silver (32) medals out of all countries. the u.s. topped the medal count for the first time since 1984, and for the first time since 1968 in a non-boycotted summer olympics. notable performances during competition included those of andre agassi—who became the first men's singles tennis player to combine a career grand slam with an olympic gold medal, donovan bailey—who set a new world record of 9.84 for the men's 100 meters, and lilia podkopayeva—who became the second gymnast to win an individual event gold after winning the all-round title in the same olympics.
the festivities were marred by violence on july 27, when eric rudolph detonated pipe bombs at centennial olympic park—a downtown park that was built to serve as a public focal point for the games' festivities, killing 1 and injuring 111. in 2003, rudolph confessed to the bombing and a series of related attacks on abortion centers and a gay bar, and was sentenced to life in prison. he claimed that the bombing was meant to protest the u.s. government's sanctioning of "abortion on demand".
the games turned a profit, helped by record revenue from sponsorship deals and broadcast rights, and reliance on private funding (as opposed to the extensive public funding used on later olympics), among other factors. the games faced criticism for being overly commercialized, as well as other issues noted by european officials, such as the availability of food and transport. the event had a lasting impact on the city; centennial olympic park led a revitalization of atlanta's downtown area and has served as a symbol of the games' legacy, the olympic village buildings have since been used as residence housing for area universities, and the centennial olympic stadium has been re-developed twice since the games—first as the baseball park turner field, and then as the college football venue georgia state stadium.
atlanta was selected on september 18, 1990, in tokyo, japan, over athens, belgrade, manchester, melbourne, and toronto at the 96th ioc session. the city entered the competition as a dark horse, being up against stiff competition.[5] the us media also criticized it as a second-tier city and complained of georgia's confederate history. however, the ioc evaluation commission ranked atlanta's infrastructure and facilities the highest, while ioc members said that it could guarantee large television revenues similar to the success of the 1984 summer olympics in los angeles.[6] additionally, former us ambassador to the un and atlanta mayor andrew jackson young touted atlanta's civil rights history and reputation for racial harmony. young also wanted to showcase a reformed american south. the strong economy of atlanta and improved race relations in the south helped to impress the ioc officials.[7] the atlanta committee for the olympic games (acog) also proposed a substantial revenue-sharing with the ioc, usoc, and other nocs.[7] atlanta's main rivals were toronto, whose front-running bid that began in 1986 had chances to succeed after canada had held a successful 1988 winter olympics in calgary, and melbourne, australia, who hosted the 1956 summer olympics and after brisbane, australia's failed bid for the 1992 games (which were awarded to barcelona) and prior to sydney, australia's successful 2000 summer olympics bid. this would be toronto's fourth failed attempt since 1960 (tried in 1960, 1964, and 1976, but defeated by rome, tokyo and montreal).[8]
greece, the home of the ancient and first modern olympics, was considered by many observers the "natural choice" for the centennial games.[6][7] however, athens bid chairman spyros metaxa demanded that it be named as the site of the olympics because of its "historical right due to its history", which may have caused resentment among delegates. furthermore, the athens bid was described as "arrogant and poorly prepared", being regarded as "not being up to the task of coping with the modern and risk-prone extravaganza" of the current games. athens faced numerous obstacles, including "political instability, potential security problems, air pollution, traffic congestion and the fact that it would have to spend about $3 billion to improve its infrastructure of airports, roads, rail lines and other amenities". in 1997 after atlanta hosted the games, athens was awarded to host the 2004 summer olympics.[6][9][10]
the total cost of the 1996 summer olympics was estimated to be around $1.7 billion.[13] the venues and the games themselves were funded entirely via private investment,[14] and the only public funding came from the u.s. government for security, and around $500 million of public money used on physical public infrastructure including streetscaping, road improvements, centennial olympic park (alongside $75 million in private funding), expansion of the airport, improvements in public transportation, and redevelopment of public housing projects.[15]  $420 million worth of tickets were sold, sale of sponsorship rights accounted for $540 million, and sale of the domestic broadcast rights to nbc accounted for $456 million. in total, the games turned a profit of $10 million.[16][13]
events of the 1996 games were held in a variety of areas. a number were held within the olympic ring, a 3 mi (4.8 km) circle from the center of atlanta. others were held at stone mountain, about 20 miles (32 km) outside of the city. to broaden ticket sales, other events, such as association football (soccer), were staged in various cities in the southeast.[17][18]
the olympiad's official theme, "summon the heroes", was written by john williams, making it the third olympiad at that point for which he had composed (official composer 1984; nbc's coverage composer 1988). the opening ceremony featured céline dion singing "the power of the dream", the official theme song of the 1996 olympics. the mascot for the olympiad was an abstract, animated character named izzy. in contrast to the standing tradition of mascots of national or regional significance in the city hosting the olympiad, izzy was an amorphous, fantasy figure. atlanta's olympic slogan "come celebrate our dream" was written by jack arogeti, a managing director at mccann-erickson in atlanta at the time. the slogan was selected from more than 5,000[19] submitted by the public to the atlanta convention and visitors bureau. billy payne noted that jack "captured the spirit and our true motivation for the olympic games."[20]
the city of savannah, georgia (host of the yachting events) held its own local festivities, including a local cauldron lighting event on the first day of the games (headlined by a performance by country musician trisha yearwood).[21]
the syndicated game show wheel of fortune taped three weeks of olympics-themed episodes from the fox theater in atlanta for broadcast in april and july 1996, which included prizes from the games' official sponsors.[22][23] a video game featuring the games' mascot, izzy's quest for the olympic rings, was also released.[24]
the ceremony began with a 60-second countdown, which included footage from all of the previous olympic games. there was then a flashback to the closing ceremony of the 1992 olympics in barcelona, showing the then president of the ioc, juan antonio samaranch, inviting the athletes to compete in atlanta in 1996. then, spirits ascended in the northwest corner of the stadium, each representing one of the colors in the olympic rings. the spirits called the tribes of the world which, after mixed percussion, formed the olympic rings while the youth of atlanta formed the number 100. famed film score composer john williams wrote the official overture for the 1996 olympics, called "summon the heroes"; this was his second overture for an olympic games, the first being "olympic fanfare and theme" written for the 1984 summer olympics. céline dion performed david foster's official 1996 olympics song "the power of the dream", accompanied by foster on the piano, the atlanta symphony orchestra and the centennial choir (comprising morehouse college glee club, spelman college glee club and the atlanta symphony orchestra chorus). gladys knight sang georgia's official state song "georgia on my mind".
there was a showcase entitled "welcome to the world", featuring cheerleaders, chevrolet pick-up trucks, marching bands, and steppers, which highlighted the american youth and a typical saturday college football game in the south, including the wave commonly produced by spectators in sporting events around the world. there was another showcase entitled "summertime" which focused on atlanta and the old south, emphasizing its beauty, spirit, music, history, culture, and rebirth after the american civil war. the ceremony also featured a memorable dance tribute to the athletes and to the goddesses of victory of the ancient greek olympics, using silhouette imagery. the accompanying music, "the tradition of the games", was composed by basil poledouris.[25]
muhammad ali lit the olympic cauldron and later received a replacement gold medal for his boxing victory in the 1960 summer olympics. for the torch ceremony, more than 10,000 olympic torches were manufactured by the american meter company and electroplated by erie plating company. each torch weighed about 3.5 pounds (1.6 kg) and was made primarily of aluminum, with a georgia pecan wood handle and gold ornamentation.[26][27]
the 1996 summer olympic programme featured 271 events in 26 sports. softball, beach volleyball and mountain biking debuted on the olympic program, together with women's football and lightweight rowing.




in women's gymnastics, lilia podkopayeva became the all-around olympic champion. podkopayeva also won a second gold medal in the floor exercise final and a silver on the beam – becoming the only female gymnast since nadia comăneci to win an individual event gold after winning the all-round title in the same olympics. kerri strug of the united states women's gymnastics team vaulted with an injured ankle and landed on one foot. the us women's gymnastics team won its first gold medal. shannon miller of the united states won the gold medal on the balance beam event, the first time an american gymnast had won an individual gold medal in a non-boycotted olympic games. the spanish team won the first gold medal in the new competition of women's rhythmic group all-around. the team was formed by estela giménez, marta baldó, nuria cabanillas, lorena guréndez, estíbaliz martínez and tania lamarca.
amy van dyken won four gold medals in the olympic swimming pool, the first american woman to win four titles in a single olympiad. penny heyns, swimmer of south africa, won the gold medals in both the 100 metres and 200 metres breaststroke events. michelle smith of ireland won three gold medals and a bronze in swimming. she remains her nation's most decorated olympian. however, her victories were overshadowed by doping allegations even though she did not test positive in 1996. she received a four-year suspension in 1998 for tampering with a urine sample, though her medals and records were allowed to stand.
in track and field, donovan bailey of canada won the men's 100 m, setting a new world record of 9.84 seconds at that time. he also anchored his team's gold in the 4 × 100 m relay.
michael johnson won gold in both the 200 m and 400 m, setting a new world record of 19.32 seconds in the 200 m. marie-josé pérec equaled johnson's performance, although without a world record, by winning the rare 200 m/400 m double. carl lewis won his 4th long jump gold medal at the age of 35.
in tennis, andre agassi won the gold medal, which would eventually make him the first man and second singles player overall (after his eventual wife, steffi graf) to win the career golden slam, which consists of an olympic gold medal and victories in the singles tournaments held at professional tennis' four major events (australian open, french open, wimbledon, and us open).
there were a series of national firsts realized during the games. deon hemmings became the first woman to win an olympic gold medal for jamaica and the english-speaking west indies. lee lai shan won a gold medal in sailing, the only olympic medal that hong kong ever won as a british colony (1842–1997). this meant that for the only time, the colonial flag of hong kong was raised to the accompaniment of the british national anthem "god save the queen", as hong kong's sovereignty was later transferred to china in 1997. the us women's football team won the gold medal in the first ever women's football event. for the first time, olympic medals were won by athletes from armenia, azerbaijan, belarus, burundi, ecuador, georgia, hong kong, kazakhstan, moldova, mozambique, slovakia, tonga, ukraine, and uzbekistan. another first in atlanta was that this was the first summer olympics ever that not a single nation swept all three medals in a single event.
these are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1996 games.
  *   host nation (united states)a total of 197 nations were represented at the 1996 games, and the combined total of athletes was about 10,318.[28] twenty-four countries made their olympic debut this year, including eleven of the ex-soviet countries that competed as part of the unified team in 1992. russia competed independently for the first time since 1912, when it was the russian empire. the federal republic of yugoslavia competed as yugoslavia.
the 14 countries making their olympic debut were: azerbaijan, burundi, cape verde, comoros, dominica, guinea-bissau, macedonia, nauru, palestinian authority, saint kitts and nevis, saint lucia, são tomé and príncipe, tajikistan and turkmenistan. the ten countries making their summer olympic debut (after competing at the 1994 winter olympics in lillehammer) were: armenia, belarus, czech republic, georgia, kazakhstan, kyrgyzstan, moldova, slovakia, ukraine and uzbekistan. the czech republic and slovakia attended the games as independent nations for the first time since the breakup of czechoslovakia, while the rest of the nations that made their summer olympic debut were formerly part of the soviet union.
the 1996 olympics were marred by the centennial olympic park bombing on july 27.  security guard richard jewell discovered the pipe bomb and immediately notified law enforcement and helped evacuate as many people as possible from the area before it exploded.  although jewell's quick actions are credited for saving many lives, the bombing killed spectator alice hawthorne, wounded 111 others, and caused the death of melih uzunyol by heart attack. jewell was later considered a suspect in the bombing but was never charged, and he was cleared in october 1996. in 2003, eric robert rudolph was charged with and confessed to this bombing as well as the bombings of two abortion clinics and a gay bar. he stated "the purpose of the attack on july 27th was to confound, anger and embarrass the washington government in the eyes of the world for its abominable sanctioning of abortion on demand."[29] he was sentenced to a life sentence at adx florence prison in florence, colorado.
preparations for the olympics lasted more than six years and had an economic impact of at least $5.14 billion. over two million visitors came to atlanta, and approximately 3.5 billion people around the world watched at least part of the games on television. although marred by the tragedy of the centennial olympic park bombing, they were a financial success, due in part to tv rights contracts and sponsorships at record levels.[30]
beyond international recognition, the games resulted in many modern infrastructure improvements. the mid-rise dormitories built for the olympic village, which became the first residential housing for georgia state university (georgia state village), are now used by the georgia institute of technology (north avenue apartments). as designed, centennial olympic stadium was converted into turner field, which became the home of the atlanta braves major league baseball team from 1997 to 2016. the braves' former home, atlanta–fulton county stadium, was demolished in 1997 and the site became a parking lot for turner field; the omni coliseum was demolished the same year to make way for philips arena (since renamed state farm arena). the city's permanent memorial to the 1996 olympics is centennial olympic park, which was built as a focal point for the games. the park initiated a revitalization of the surrounding area, and now serves as the hub for atlanta's tourism district.[30]
in november 2016, a commemorative plaque was unveiled for centennial olympic park to honor the 20th anniversary of the games.[31][32]
after the braves' departure from turner field, georgia state university acquired the former olympic stadium and surrounding parking lots and reconfigured the stadium for a second time into georgia state stadium for its college football team.
the 1996 olympics are the most recent edition of the summer olympics to be held in the united states. los angeles will host the 2028 summer olympics, 32 years after the games were held in atlanta.[33]
the 1996 games were covered by the following broadcasters:[18]
the 1996 summer olympics relied heavily on commercial sponsorship. the atlanta-based coca-cola company was the exclusive provider of soft drinks at olympics venues, and built an attraction known as coca-cola olympic city for the games.[35]
the games were affected by several instances of ambush marketing—in which companies attempt to use the games as a means to promote their brand, in competition with the exclusive, category-based sponsorship rights issued by the atlanta organizing committee and the ioc (which grants the rights to use olympics-related terms and emblems in marketing). the atlanta organizing committee threatened legal actions against advertisers whose marketing implied an official association with the games. several non-sponsors set up marketing activities in areas near venues, such as samsung (competing with motorola), which ambushed the games with its "'96 expo".[36][37] the city of atlanta had also licensed street vendors to sell products from competitors to olympic sponsors.[38][39]
the most controversial ambush campaign was undertaken by nike, inc., which had begun an advertising campaign with aggressive slogans that mocked the games' values, such as "faster, higher, stronger, badder", "if you're not here to win, you're a tourist", and "you don't win silver, you lose gold." the slogans were featured on magazine ads and billboards it purchased in atlanta.[36] nike also opened a pop-up store known as the nike center near the athletes' village, which distributed nike-branded flags to visitors (presumably to be used at events).[40]  ioc marketing director michael payne expressed concern for the campaign, believing that athletes could perceive them as being an insult to their accomplishments.[40]  payne and united states olympic committee's marketing director john krimsky met with howard slusher, a subordinate of nike co-founder phil knight. the meeting quickly turned aggressive, with payne threatening that the ioc could pull accreditation for nike employees, ban the display of its logos on equipment, and organize a press conference where silver medallists from the games, as well as prominent nike-sponsored athlete michael johnson (who attracted attention during the games for wearing custom, gold-colored nike shoes), would denounce the company. faced with these threats, nike agreed to retract most of its negative advertising and pr stunts.[40]
a report prepared by european olympic officials after the games was critical of atlanta's performance in several key issues, including the level of crowding in the olympic village, the quality of available food, the accessibility and convenience of transportation, and the games' general atmosphere of commercialism.[41]  ioc vice-president dick pound defended criticism of the commercialization of these games, stating that they still adhered to a historic policy barring the display of advertising within venues, and that "you have to look to the private sector for at least a portion of the funding, and unless you're looking for handouts, you're dealing with people who are investing business assets, and they have to get a return."[38]
the financial struggles faced by many later games, such as the 2016 summer olympics in rio de janeiro, brazil, have led to more positive re-appraisals of the management of the 1996 games. former jpmorgan chase president (and torchbearer) kabir sehgal noted that in contrast to many later games, the 1996 olympics were financially viable, had a positive economic impact on the city, and most of the facilities constructed for the games still see use in the present day. sehgal contrasted the games' bid — a "grassroots" effort backed almost entirely by private funding, with the only significant public spending coming from infrastructure associated with the games — to modern "top-down" bids, instigated by local governments and reliant on taxpayer funding, making them unpopular among citizens who may not necessarily be interested.[13]
at the closing ceremony, ioc president juan antonio samaranch said in his closing speech, "well done, atlanta" and simply called the games "most exceptional." this broke precedent for samaranch, who had traditionally labeled each games "the best olympics ever" at each closing ceremony, a practice he resumed at the subsequent games in sydney in 2000.[42]
in 1997, athens, greece would be awarded the 2004 summer olympics. along with addressing the shortcomings of its 1996 bid, it was lauded for its efforts to promote the traditional values of the olympic games, which some ioc observers felt had been lost due to the over-commercialization of the 1996 games. however, the 2004 games heavily relied on public funding and eventually failed to make a profit, and contributed to the financial crisis in greece.[43][44][45]

the 2000 summer olympics, officially known as the games of the xxvii olympiad and commonly known as sydney 2000 or the millennium olympic games/games of the new millennium, were an international multi-sport event held between 15 september and 1 october 2000 in sydney, new south wales, australia. it was the second time the summer olympics were held in australia, and also the southern hemisphere, the first being in melbourne, victoria, in 1956. 
sydney won the right to host the games on 24 september 1993, after being selected over beijing, berlin, istanbul and manchester in four rounds of voting, at the 101st ioc session in monte carlo, monaco. the australian city of melbourne had lost out to atlanta for the 1996 summer olympics four years earlier.[3] beijing lost its bid to host the games to sydney in 1993, but was later awarded the 2008 summer olympics in july 2001 after sydney hosted the previous year, and it would eventually be awarded the 2022 winter olympics twenty-two years later in 2015. although it is impossible to know why members of the international olympic committee voted for sydney over beijing in 1993, it appears that an important role was played by human rights watch's campaign to "stop beijing" because of china's human rights record. many in china were angry at what they saw as u.s.-led interference in the vote, and the outcome contributed to rising anti-western sentiment in china and tensions in sino-american relations.[4]
the oxford olympics study 2016 estimates the outturn cost of the sydney 2000 summer olympics at us$5 billion in 2015-dollars and cost overrun at 90% in real terms.[6] this includes sports-related costs only, that is, (i) operational costs incurred by the organizing committee for the purpose of staging the games, e.g., expenditures for technology, transportation, workforce, administration, security, catering, ceremonies, and medical services, and (ii) direct capital costs incurred by the host city and country or private investors to build, e.g., the competition venues, the olympic village, international broadcast center, and media and press center, which are required to host the games. indirect capital costs are not included, such as for road, rail, or airport infrastructure, or for hotel upgrades or other business investment incurred in preparation for the games but not directly related to staging the games. the cost for sydney 2000 compares with a cost of us$4.6 billion for rio 2016, us$40–44 billion for beijing 2008 and us$51 billion for sochi 2014, the most expensive olympics in history. average cost for the summer games since 1960 is us$5.2 billion, average cost overrun is 176%.
in 2000, the auditor-general of new south wales reported that the sydney games cost a$6.6 billion, with a net cost to the public between a$1.7 and a$2.4 billion.[7][8] many venues were constructed in the sydney olympic park, which failed in the years immediately following the olympics to meet the expected bookings to meet upkeep expenses.[9] in the years leading up to the games, funds were shifted from education and health programs to cover olympic expenses.[10]
it has been estimated that the economic impact of the 2000 olympics was that a$2.1 billion has been shaved from public consumption. economic growth was not stimulated to a net benefit and in the years after 2000, foreign tourism to nsw grew by less than tourism to australia as a whole. a "multiplier" effect on broader economic development is not realised, as a simple "multiplier" analysis fails to capture is that resources have to be redirected from elsewhere: the building of a stadium is at the expense of other public works such as extensions to hospitals. building sporting venues does not add to the aggregate stock of productive capital in the years following the games: "equestrian centres, softball compounds and man-made rapids are not particularly useful beyond their immediate function."[11]
in the years after the games, infrastructure issues have been of growing concern to citizens, especially those in the western suburbs of sydney. proposed rail links to sydney's west have been estimated to cost in the same order of magnitude as the public expenditure on the games.[citation needed]
although the olympic games opening ceremony was not scheduled until 15 september, the football competitions began with preliminary matches on 13 september. among the pre-ceremony fixtures, host nation australia lost 1–0 to italy at the melbourne cricket ground, which was the main stadium for the 1956 melbourne olympics.
the opening ceremony began with a tribute to the australian pastoral heritage of the australian stockmen and the importance of the stock horse in australia's heritage. it was produced and filmed by sydney olympic broadcasting organisation and the home nation broadcaster, channel 7.[12] this was introduced by a lone rider, steve jefferys, and his rearing australian stock horse ammo. at the cracking of jefferys' stockwhip, a further 120 riders entered the stadium, their stock horses performing intricate steps, including forming the five olympic rings, to a special olympics version of the theme which bruce rowland had previously composed for the 1982 film the man from snowy river.
the australian national anthem was sung, the first verse by human nature and the second by julie anthony.
the ceremony continued, showing many aspects of the land and its people:- the affinity of the mainly coastal-dwelling australians with the sea that surrounds the "island continent". the indigenous occupation of the land, the coming of the first fleet, the continued immigration from many nations and the rural industry on which the economy of the nation was built, including a display representing the harshness of rural life based on the paintings of sir sidney nolan. two memorable scenes were the representation of the "heart" of the country by 200 aboriginal women from central australia who danced up "the mighty spirit of god to protect the games" and the overwhelmingly noisy representation of the construction industry by hundreds of tap-dancing teenagers.
because bibi salisachs (the wife of juan antonio samaranch, the ioc president) was seriously ill and not able to accompany her husband to the olympics, former australian olympic champion swimmer and member of the parliament of new south wales, dawn fraser, accompanied samaranch during the australian cultural display, explaining to him some of the cultural references that are unfamiliar to non-australians.
a record 199 nations entered the stadium, with a record 80 of them winning at least one medal. the only missing ioc member was afghanistan (banned due to the extremist rule of the taliban's oppression of women and its prohibition of sports[13]). the ceremony featured a unified entrance by the athletes of north and south korea,[a] using a specially designed unification flag: a white background flag with a blue map of the korean peninsula. four athletes from east timor also marched in the parade of nations as individual olympic athletes and marched directly before the host country. although the country-to-be had no national olympic committee then, they were allowed to compete under the olympic flag with country code ioa. the governor-general, sir william deane, opened the games.
the olympic flag was carried around the arena by eight former australian olympic champions: bill roycroft, murray rose, liane tooth, gillian rolton, marjorie jackson, lorraine crapp, michael wenden and nick green. during the raising of the olympics flag, the olympic hymn was sung by the millennium choir of the greek orthodox archdiocese of australia in greek. following this, tina arena sang a purpose-written pop song, the flame.[14]
the opening ceremony concluded with the lighting of the olympic flame. former australian olympic champion herb elliott brought the olympic flame into the stadium. then, celebrating 100 years of women's participation in the olympic games, former australian women olympic medalists: betty cuthbert and raelene boyle, dawn fraser, shirley strickland (later shirley strickland de la hunty), shane gould and debbie flintoff-king brought the torch through the stadium, handing it over to cathy freeman, who lit the flame in the cauldron within a circle of fire. the planned spectacular climax to the ceremony was delayed by the technical glitch of a computer switch which malfunctioned, causing the sequence to shut down by giving a false reading. this meant that the olympic flame was suspended in mid-air for about four minutes, rather than immediately rising up a water-covered ramp to the top of the stadium. when the cause of the problem was discovered, the program was overridden and the cauldron continued its course, and the ceremony concluded with a spectacular fireworks display.[15]
the first medals of the games were awarded in the women's 10 metre air rifle competition, which was won by nancy johnson of the united states.
the triathlon made its olympic debut with the women's race. set in the surroundings of the sydney opera house, brigitte mcmahon representing switzerland swam, cycled and ran to the first gold medal in the sport, beating the favoured home athletes such as michelie jones who won silver. mcmahon only passed jones in sight of the finish line.
the first star of the games was ian thorpe. the 17-year-old australian first set a new world record in the 400 m freestyle final before competing in an exciting 4 × 100 m freestyle final. swimming the last leg, thorpe passed the leading americans and arrived in a new world record time, two tenths of a second ahead of the americans. in the same event for women, the americans also broke the world record, finishing ahead of the netherlands and sweden.
samaranch had to leave for home, as his wife was severely ill. upon arrival, his wife had already died. samaranch returned to sydney four days later. the olympic flag was flown at half-staff during the period as a sign of respect to samaranch's wife.
canadian simon whitfield sprinted away in the last 100 metres of the men's triathlon, becoming the inaugural winner in the event.
on the cycling track, robert bartko beat fellow german jens lehmann in the individual pursuit, setting a new olympic record. leontien zijlaard-van moorsel set a world record in the semi-finals the same event for women.
in the swimming pool, american tom dolan beat the world record in the 400 m medley, successfully defending the title he won in atlanta four years prior. dutchwoman inge de bruijn also clocked a new world record, beating her own time in the 100 m butterfly final to win by more than a second.
the main event for the australians on the fourth day of the games was the 200 m freestyle. dutchman pieter van den hoogenband had broken the world record in the semi-finals, taking it from the new australian hero ian thorpe, who came close to the world record in his semi-final heat. as the final race finished, van den hoogenband's time was exactly the same as in the semi-finals, finishing ahead of thorpe by half a second.
china won the gold medal in the men's team all-around gymnastics competition, after being the runner-up in the previous two olympics. the other medals were taken by ukraine and russia, respectively.
zijlaard-van moorsel lived up to the expectations set by her world record in cycling in the semis by winning the gold medal.
controversy erupted at the women's gymnastics all-around final, when gymnast after gymnast fell on the vault. some gymnasts were physically injured, and all were shaken, but nothing was done to try to discover the reason most gymnasts were having severe problems. finally, in the middle of the third round (out of four), it was determined that the vault horse had been set 5 cm too low – enough of a difference to throw off the impeccable timing of many of these world-class athletes. while athletes were allowed to vault again, the remedy did not fully repair injuries and shaken confidence. the medals were eventually all won by romanian gymnasts, with andreea raducan becoming the first athlete from her country to win the title since nadia comaneci in 1976. teammates simona amanar and maria olaru took silver and bronze, respectively. this result also marked the first sweep of the event since the soviet union's in 1960.
by rowing in the winning coxless four, steve redgrave of great britain became a member of a select group who had won gold medals at five consecutive olympics.
the swimming 4 x 100-metre medley relay of b.j. bedford, megan quann (jendrick), jenny thompson and dara torres became the first women's relay under 4-minutes, swimming 3:58 and setting a world record, claiming the gold medal for the united states.
rulon gardner, never a ncaa champion or a world medalist, beat alexander karelin of russia to win gold in the super heavyweight class, greco-roman wrestling. karelin had won gold in seoul, barcelona and atlanta. before this fight he had never lost in international competition, had been unbeaten in all competitions in 13 years, and had not surrendered a point in a decade.
australian cathy freeman won the 400 metre final in front of a jubilant sydney crowd at the olympic stadium, ahead of lorraine graham of jamaica and katharine merry of great britain. freeman's win made her the first competitor in olympic games history to light the olympic flame and then go on to win a gold medal. the attendance at the stadium was 112,524 – the largest attendance for any sport in olympic games history.
in a men's basketball pool match between the usa and france, the usa's vince carter made one of the most famous dunks in basketball history. after getting the ball off a steal, the 6'6"/1.98 m carter drove to the basket, with 7'2"/2.18 m centre frédéric weis in his way. carter jumped, spread his legs in midair, scraped weis' head on the way up, and dunked. the french media dubbed the feat le dunk de la mort ("the dunk of death").
the canadian flag at athletes' village is lowered to half-staff as canadian athletes pay tribute to former prime minister pierre trudeau after hearing of his death in montreal (because of the time difference, it was 29 september in sydney when trudeau died). the canadian flag flew at half-staff for the remainder of the olympics, on orders from both ioc president juan antonio samaranch and canadian foreign affairs minister lloyd axworthy, as the state funeral did not take place until 3 october.
cameroon won a historic gold medal over spain in the men's olympic football final at the olympic stadium. the game went to a penalty shootout, which was won by cameroon 5–3.[16]
the last event of the games was the men's marathon, contested on a course that started in north sydney. the event was won by ethiopian genzhnge abera, with eric wananina second and tesefe tola, also of ethiopia third. it was the first time since the 1968 olympics that an ethiopian had won the gold medal in this event.
the closing ceremony commenced with christine anu singing her version of the warumpi band's song, my island home. she performed with several aboriginal dancers atop the geodome stage in the middle of the stadium, around which several hundred umbrella and lampbox kids created an image of aboriginal dreamtime.
the geodome stage was used throughout the ceremony, which is a flat stage which is mechanically raised into the shape of a geode.
ioc president juan antonio samaranch declared at the closing ceremony,[17]
i am proud and happy to proclaim that you have presented to the world the best olympic games ever.
subsequent summer olympics held in athens, beijing and london have been described by samaranch's successor, jacques rogge, as "unforgettable, dream games", "truly exceptional" and "happy and glorious games" respectively – the practice of declaring games the "best ever" having been retired after the 2000 games.
the olympic hymn was sung by soprano yvonne kenny. the ceremony also featured performing artists such as jimmy barnes, inxs, midnight oil, kylie minogue, slim dusty, christine anu, nikki webster, john paul young, men at work, melbourne-based singer vanessa amorosi, tommy emmanuel, and pop duo savage garden.
the games were then handed over to their modern birthplace, athens, which succeeded sydney as summer olympic host city. two greek flags were raised; one to honour the birthplace of the olympics, and the other to honour athens. the ceremony concluded with a huge fireworks display on sydney harbour. the fireworks display itself concluded with a very low flyover of stadium australia by an raaf f-111c which performed a dump-and-burn manoeuvre synchronised with the extinction of the olympic flame. this created the appearance of the flame being carried away into the sky, flying in a northeasterly direction out across sydney harbour and ultimately towards athens in a symbolic handover.
in honour of her gold medal win during the games, cathy freeman represented oceania in carrying the olympic flag, joining archbishop desmond tutu (africa), john glenn (the americas), kazuyoshi funaki (asia), lech wałęsa (europe), jean-michel cousteau (environment), jean-claude killy (sport), and steven spielberg (culture) when it was raised again, at the xix olympic winter games in salt lake city; the opening ceremony there took place on 8 february 2002.
the 2000 summer olympic programme featured 300 events in the following 28 sports:




although demonstration sports were abolished following the 1992 summer olympics the sydney olympics featured wheelchair racing as exhibition events on the athletics schedule.[18]
special quarantine conditions were introduced to allow entry of horses into australia to participate in equestrian events,[19] avoiding the need for such events to take place elsewhere as had happened at the 1956 summer olympics in melbourne.
these are the top ten nations that won medals in the 2000 games.
the ranking in this table is based on information provided by the international olympic committee.[20] some other sources[21] may be inconsistent due to not taking into account all later doping cases.
  *   host nation (australia)
199 national olympic committees (nocs) participated in the sydney games, two more than in the 1996 summer olympics. in addition, there were four timorese individual olympic athletes at the 2000 summer olympics. eritrea, federated states of micronesia and palau made their olympic debut this year.
afghanistan was the only 1996 participant that did not participate in 2000, having been banned due to the extremist rule of the taliban's oppression of women and its prohibition of sports.
a number of quasi-government bodies were responsible for the construction, organisation and execution of the sydney games. these included:
these organisations worked closely together and with other bodies such as:
these bodies are often collectively referred to as the "olympic family".
organisation of the 2000 summer paralympics was the responsibility of spoc the sydney paralympic organising committee. however much of the planning and operation of the paralympic games was outsourced to socog such that most operational programmes planned both the olympic and paralympic games.
organisation of the games included not only the actual sporting events but also the management (and sometimes construction) of the sporting venues and surrounding precincts, the organisation of the sydney olympic arts festival and olympic torch relay. the relay began in greece and travelled to australia via numerous oceania island nations.
the staging of the olympics were treated as a project on a vast scale, with the project broken into several broad phases:
the internal organisation of socog evolved over the phases of the project and changed, sometimes radically, several times.
in late 1998 the design was principally functional. the top two tiers below the ceo sandy hollway consisted of five groups (managed by group general managers and the deputy ceo) and twenty divisions (managed by divisional general managers), which in turn were further broken up into programmes and sub-programmes or projects.
in 1999 functional areas (fas) broke up into geographic precinct and venue teams (managed by precinct managers and venue managers) with functional area staff reporting to both the fa manager and the venue manager. ie, socog moved to a matrix structure. the interstate football division extant in 1998 was the first of these geographically based venue teams.
the origins of the volunteer programme for sydney 2000 dates back to the bid, as early as 1992.
on 17 december 1992, a group of sydney citizens, interested in the prospect of hosting the 2000 olympic and paralympic games, gathered for a meeting at sports house, at wentworth park in sydney.
in the period leading up to 1999, after sydney had won the bid, the small group of volunteers grew from approximately 42 to around 500. these volunteers became known as pioneer volunteers. the pioneer volunteer programme was managed internally by socog's volunteer services department in consultation with prominent peak groups like the centre for volunteering (volunteering and tafe. some of the pioneer volunteers still meet every four months, an unseen legacy of the games which brought together a community spirit not seen before.
during the olympic games tens of thousands of volunteers, the official figure was placed at 46,967,[22] helped everywhere at the olympic venues and elsewhere in the city. they were honoured with a parade like the athletes had a few days before.[23]
the bid logo, designed by architect and designer michael bryce,[24] featured a colourful, stylised image of the sydney opera house.
the official logo – also referred to as the "millennium man"[25] – took the image of the bid logo and combined it with a stylised image of a runner to form a torchbearer in motion; formed by two small yellow boomerangs for arms and a larger red boomerang for legs. the olympic torch is represented through a blue smoke trail, which draws the iconic peaks of the sydney opera house.
the design process of the official logo, as well as all other aspects of the olympic games' visual design identity, was awarded to melbourne design studio fha image design.[26] the sydney olympics brand identity project officially commenced in 1993.
the official mascots chosen for the 2000 summer olympics were syd the platypus, millie the echidna, and olly the kookaburra[27] and were designed by matthew hattan and jozef szekeres and named by philip sheldon of agency weekes morris osborn in response to the original socog recommendation of murray, margery and dawn after famous australian athletes.
there was also an unofficial mascot, fatso the fat-arsed wombat, which was popularised by comedy team roy slaven and hg nelson on the tv series the dream with roy and hg. roy and hg also frequently disparaged the official mascots on their television program.[28][29][30]
the bronze medals for the 2000 olympics were created from melted down australian 1 cent and 2 cent coins[31][32] – which had been removed from circulation from 1992 onward.
the bouquets handed to medal recipients incorporated foliage from the grevillea baileyana, also known as the white oak.[33]
the international olympic committee awarded sydney and its inhabitants with the "pierre de coubertin trophy" in recognition of the collaboration and happiness shown by the people of sydney during the event to all the athletes and visitors around the world.[34]
the new south wales police force was granted use of the olympic rings in the new south wales police force olympic commendation and the new south wales police force olympic citation for having staged the "safest" games ever.
in f.j. campbell's 2018 novel no number nine, the last part of the book is set at the sydney 2000 olympics.[35]
in tom clancy's thriller rainbow six, the 2000 olympic games are the setting of a plot by eco-terrorists, who plan to use the games in order to spread a terrible new plague throughout the world.[36]
in morris gleitzman's children's book toad rage, a cane toad travels to sydney in a bid to become the olympic mascot.[37]

the 2004 summer olympics (greek: θερινοί ολυμπιακοί αγώνες 2004, therinoí olympiakoí agónes 2004),[2] officially known as the games of the xxviii olympiad and commonly known as athens 2004, was a premier international multi-sport event held in athens, greece, from 13 to 29 august 2004 with the motto welcome home.
the games saw 10,625 athletes compete,[3][4] some 600 more than expected, accompanied by 5,501 team officials from 201 countries.[3] there were 301 medal events in 28 different sports.[3] athens 2004 marked the first time since the 1996 summer olympics that all countries with a national olympic committee were in attendance. 2004 also marked the return of the olympic games to the city where they began. having previously hosted the olympics in 1896, athens became one of only four cities to have hosted the summer olympic games on two separate occasions at the time (together with paris, london and los angeles).
a new medal obverse was introduced at these games, replacing the design by giuseppe cassioli that had been used since the 1928 games. this rectified the long lasting mistake of using a depiction of the roman colosseum rather than a greek venue.[5] the new design features the panathenaic stadium.[6] the 2004 summer games were hailed as "unforgettable, dream games" by ioc president jacques rogge, and left athens with a significantly improved infrastructure, including a new airport, ring road, and subway system.[7]
there have been arguments (mostly in popular media) regarding the cost of the 2004 athens summer games and their possible contribution to the greek government-debt crisis, however, there is little or no evidence for such a correlation.
the 2004 olympics were generally deemed to be a success, with the rising standard of competition amongst nations across the world. the final medal tally was led by the united states, followed by china and russia with the host greece at 15th place. several world and olympic records were broken during these games.
athens was chosen as the host city during the 106th ioc session held in lausanne on 5 september 1997. athens had lost its bid to organize the 1996 summer olympics to atlanta nearly seven years before on 18 september 1990, during the 96th ioc session in tokyo. under the direction of gianna angelopoulos-daskalaki, athens pursued another bid, this time for the right to host the summer olympics in 2004. the success of athens in securing the 2004 games was based largely on athens' appeal to olympic history and the emphasis that it placed on the pivotal role that greece and athens could play in promoting olympism and the olympic movement.[8] the bid for the 2004 games was lauded for its humility and earnestness, its focused message, and its detailed bid concept.[9] the 2004 bid addressed concerns and criticisms raised in its unsuccessful 1996 bid – primarily athens' infrastructural readiness, its air pollution, its budget, and politicization of games preparations.[10] athens' successful organization of the 1997 world championships in athletics the month before the host city election was also crucial in allaying lingering fears and concerns among the sporting community and some ioc members about its ability to host international sporting events.[11] another factor which also contributed to athens' selection was a growing sentiment among some ioc members to restore the values of the olympics to the games, a component which they felt was lost.[12][12]
after leading all voting rounds, athens easily defeated rome in the 5th and final vote. cape town, stockholm, and buenos aires, the three other cities that made the ioc shortlist, were eliminated in prior rounds of voting. six other cities submitted applications, but their bids were dropped by the ioc in 1996. these cities were istanbul, lille, rio de janeiro, san juan, seville and saint petersburg.[13]
the 2004 summer olympic games cost the government of greece €8.954 billion to stage.[14] according to the cost-benefit evaluation of the impact of the athens 2004 olympic games presented to the greek parliament in january 2013 by the minister of finance mr. giannis stournaras, the overall net economic benefit for greece was positive.[15]
the athens 2004 organizing committee (athoc), responsible for the preparation and organisation of the games, concluded its operations as a company in 2005 with a surplus of €130.6 million. athoc contributed €123.6 million of the surplus to the greek state to cover other related expenditures of the greek state in organizing the games. as a result, athoc reported in its official published accounts a net profit of €7 million.[16][17] the state's contribution to the total athoc budget was 8% of its expenditure against an originally anticipated 14%.
the overall revenue of athoc, including income from tickets, sponsors, broadcasting rights, merchandise sales etc., totalled €2,098.4 million. the largest percentage of that income (38%) came from broadcasting rights. the overall expenditure of athoc was €1,967.8 million.
often analysts refer to the "cost of the olympic games" by taking into account not only the organizing committee's budget (i.e. the organizational cost) directly related to the olympic games, but also the cost incurred by the hosting country during preparation, i.e. the large projects required for the upgrade of the country's infrastructure, including sports infrastructure, roads, airports, hospitals, power grid etc. this cost, however, is not directly attributable to the actual organisation of the games. such infrastructure projects are considered by all fiscal standards as fixed asset investments that stay with the hosting country for decades after the games. also, in many cases these infrastructure upgrades would have taken place regardless of hosting the olympic games, although the latter may have acted as a "catalyst".
it was in this sense that the greek ministry of finance reported in 2013 that the expenses of the greek state for the athens 2004 olympic games, including both infrastructure and organizational costs, reached the amount of €8.5 billion. the same report further explains that €2 billion of this amount was covered by the revenue of the athoc (from tickets, sponsors, broadcasting rights, merchandise sales etc.) and that another €2 billion was directly invested in upgrading hospitals and archaeological sites.
therefore, the net infrastructure costs related to the preparation of the athens 2004 olympic games was €4.5 billion, substantially lower than the reported estimates,[18] and mainly included long-standing fixed asset investments in numerous municipal and transport infrastructures.
on the revenue side, the same report estimates that incremental tax revenues of approximately €3.5 billion arose from the increased activities caused by the athens 2004 olympic games during the period 2000 to 2004. these tax revenues were paid directly to the greek state specifically in the form of incremental social security contributions, income taxes and vat tax paid by all the companies, professionals, and service providers that were directly involved with the olympic games. moreover, it is reported that the athens 2004 olympic games have had a great economic growth impact on the tourism sector, one of the pillars of the greek economy, as well as in many other sectors.
the final verdict on the cost of the athens 2004 olympic games, in the words of the greek minister of finance, is that "as a result from the cost-benefit analysis, we reach the conclusion that there has been a net economic benefit from the olympic games"
the oxford olympics study 2016 estimates the outturn cost of athens 2004 at us$2.9 billion in 2015-dollars.[19] this figure includes only sports-related costs, that is, (i) operational costs incurred by the organizing committee for the purpose of staging the games, of which the largest components are technology, transportation, workforce, and administration costs, while other operational costs include security, catering, ceremonies, and medical services, and (ii) direct capital costs incurred by the host city and country or private investors to build the competition venues, the olympic village, international broadcast center, and media and press center, which are required to host the games. indirect capital costs are not included here, such as for road, rail, or airport infrastructure, or for hotel upgrades or other business investment incurred in preparation for the games but not directly related to staging the games. athens 2004 cost of us$2.9 billion compares with costs of us$4.6 billion for rio 2016, us$40–44 billion for beijing 2008 and us$51 billion for sochi 2014, the most expensive olympics in history. average sports-related cost for the summer games since 1960 is us$5.2 billion.
cost per sporting event for athens 2004 was us$9.8 million. this compares with us$14.9 million for rio 2016, us$49.5 million for london 2012, and us$22.5 million for beijing 2008. average cost per event for the summer games since 1960 is us$19.9 million.
cost per athlete for athens 2004 was us$0.3 million. this compares with us$0.4 million for rio 2016, us$1.4 million for london 2012, and us$0.6 million for beijing 2008. average cost per athlete for the summer games since 1960 is us$0.6 million.
cost overrun for athens 2004 was 49 percent, measured in real terms from the bid to host the games. this compares with 51 percent for rio 2016 and 76 percent for london 2012. average cost overrun for the summer games since 1960 is 176 percent.
by late march 2004, some olympic projects were still behind schedule, and greek authorities announced that a roof it had initially proposed as an optional, non-vital addition to the aquatics center would no longer be built. the main olympic stadium, the designated facility for the opening and closing ceremonies, was completed only two months before the games opened. this stadium was completed with a retractable glass roof designed by spanish architect santiago calatrava. the same architect also designed the velodrome and other facilities.
infrastructure, such as the tram line linking venues in southern athens with the city centre, and numerous venues were considerably behind schedule just two months before the start of the games. the subsequent pace of preparation, however, made the rush to finish the athens venues one of the tightest in olympics history. the greeks, unperturbed, maintained that they would make it all along. by july/august 2004, all venues were delivered: in august, the olympic stadium was officially completed and opened, joined or preceded by the official completion and openings of other venues within the athens olympic sports complex (oaka), and the sports complexes in faliro and helliniko.
late july and early august witnessed the athens tram become operational, and this system provided additional connections to those already existing between athens city centre and its waterfront communities along the saronic gulf. these communities included the port city of piraeus, agios kosmas (site of the sailing venue), helliniko (the site of the old international airport which now contained the fencing venue, the canoe/kayak slalom course, the 15,000-seat helliniko olympic basketball arena, and the softball and baseball stadia), and the faliro coastal zone olympic complex (site of the taekwondo, handball, indoor volleyball, and beach volleyball venues, as well as the newly reconstructed karaiskaki stadium for football). the upgrades to the athens ring road were also delivered just in time, as were the expressway upgrades connecting central athens with peripheral areas such as markopoulo (site of the shooting and equestrian venues), the newly constructed eleftherios venizelos international airport, schinias (site of the rowing venue), maroussi (site of the oaka), parnitha (site of the olympic village), galatsi (site of the rhythmic gymnastics and table tennis venue), and vouliagmeni (site of the triathlon venue). the upgrades to the athens metro were also completed, and the new lines became operational by mid-summer.
emi released unity, the official pop album of the athens olympics, in the leadup to the olympics.[20] it features contributions from sting, lenny kravitz, moby, destiny's child, and avril lavigne.[20] emi has pledged to donate us$180,000 from the album to unicef's hiv/aids program in sub-saharan africa.[20]
at least 14 people died during the work on the facilities. most of these people were not from greece.[21]
before the games, greek hotel staff staged a series of one-day strikes over wage disputes. they had been asking for a significant raise for the period covering the event being staged. paramedics and ambulance drivers also protested. they claimed to have the right to the same olympic bonuses promised to their security force counterparts.
the lighting ceremony of the olympic flame took place on 25 march 2004 in ancient olympia. for the first time ever, the flame travelled around the world in a relay to various olympic cities (past and future) and other large cities, before returning to greece.
mascots have been a tradition at the olympic games since the 1968 winter olympics in grenoble, france. the 2004 olympics had two official mascots: athena and phevos (greek pronunciation: athina and fivos). the sister and brother were named after athena, the goddess of wisdom, strategy and war, and phoebus, the god of light and music, respectively. they were inspired by the ancient daidala, which were toy dolls that also had religious connotations.
for the first time, major broadcasters were allowed to serve video coverage of the olympics over the internet, provided that they restricted this service geographically, to protect broadcasting contracts in other areas. for instance, the bbc made their complete live coverage available to uk high-speed internet customers for free; customers in the u.s. were only able to receive delayed excerpts.[22] the international olympic committee forbade olympic athletes, as well as coaches, support personnel and other officials, from setting up specialized weblogs and/or other websites for covering their personal perspective of the games. they were not allowed to post audio, video, or photos that they had taken. an exception was made if an athlete already has a personal website that was not set up specifically for the games.[23] nbc launched its own olympic website, nbcolympics.com. focusing on the television coverage of the games, it did provide video clips, medal standings, live results. its main purpose, however, was to provide a schedule of what sports were on the many stations of nbc universal. the games were shown on television 24 hours a day, on one network or another.
as with any enterprise, the organizing committee and everyone involved with it relied heavily on technology in order to deliver a successful event. athoc maintained two separate data networks, one for the preparation of the games (known as the administrative network) and one for the games themselves (games network). the technical infrastructure involved more than 11,000 computers, over 600 servers, 2,000 printers, 23,000 fixed-line telephone devices, 9,000 mobile phones, 12,000 tetra devices, 16,000 tv and video devices and 17 video walls interconnected by more than 6,000 kilometers of cabling (both optical fiber and twisted pair).
this infrastructure was created and maintained to serve directly more than 150,000 athoc staff, volunteers, olympic family members (ioc, nocs, federations), partners & sponsors and media. it also kept the information flowing for all spectators, tv viewers, website visitors and news readers around the world, prior and during the games. the media center was located inside the zappeion which is a greek national exhibition center.
between june and august 2004, the technology staff worked in the technology operations center (toc) from where it could centrally monitor and manage all the devices and flow of information, as well as handle any problems that occurred during the games. the toc was organized in teams (e.g. systems, telecommunications, information security, data network, staffing, etc.) under a toc director and corresponding team leaders (shift managers). the toc operated on a 24x7 basis with personnel organized into 12-hour shifts.
the widely praised opening ceremony directed by avant garde choreographer dimitris papaioannou and produced by jack morton worldwide led by project director david zolkwer was held on 13 august 2004. it began with a twenty eight (the number of the olympiads up to then) second countdown paced by the sounds of an amplified heartbeat.[24] as the countdown was completed, fireworks rumbled and illuminated the skies overhead. after a drum corps and bouzouki players joined in an opening march, the video screen showed images of flight, crossing southwest from athens over the greek countryside to ancient olympia. then, a single drummer in the ancient stadium joined in a drum duet with a single drummer in the main stadium in athens, joining the original ancient olympic games with the modern ones in symbolism. at the end of the drum duet, a single flaming arrow was launched from the video screen (symbolically from ancient olympia) and into the reflecting pool, which resulted in fire erupting in the middle of the stadium creating a burning image of the olympic rings rising from the pool. the opening ceremony was a pageant of traditional greek culture and history hearkening back to its mythological beginnings. the program began as a young greek boy sailed into the stadium on a 'paper-ship' waving the host nation's flag to aethereal music by hadjidakis and then a centaur appeared, followed by a gigantic head of a cycladic figurine which eventually broke into many pieces symbolising the greek islands. underneath the cycladic head was a hellenistic representation of the human body, reflecting the concept and belief in perfection reflected in greek art. a man was seen balancing on a hovering cube symbolising man's eternal 'split' between passion and reason followed by a couple of young lovers playfully chasing each other while the god eros was hovering above them. there followed a very colourful float parade chronicling greek history from the ancient minoan civilization to modern times.
although nbc in the united states presented the entire opening ceremony from start to finish, a topless minoan priestess was shown only briefly, the breasts having been pixelated digitally in order to avoid controversy (as the "nipplegate" incident was still fresh in viewer's minds at the time) and potential fines by the federal communications commission. also, lower frontal nudity of men dressed as ancient greek statues was shown in such a way that the area below the waist was cut off by the bottom of the screen. in most other countries presenting the broadcast, there was no censorship of the ceremony.
following the artistic performances, a parade of nations entered the stadium with over 10,500 athletes walking under the banners of 201 nations. the nations were arranged according to greek alphabet making finland, fiji, chile, and hong kong the last four to enter the stadium before the greek delegation. on this occasion, in observance of the tradition that the delegation of greece opens the parade and the host nation closes it, the greek flag bearer opened the parade and all the greek delegation closed it. based on audience reaction, the emotional high point of the parade was the entrance of the delegation from afghanistan which had been absent from the olympics and had female competitors for the first time. the iraqi delegation also stirred emotions. also recognized was the symbolic unified march of athletes from north korea and south korea under the korean unification flag.[a] the country of kiribati made its debut appearance at these games and east timor made a debut under its own flag. after the parade of nations, during which the dutch dj tiësto provided the music, the icelandic singer björk performed the song oceania, written specially for the event by her and the poet sjón.
the opening ceremony culminated in the lighting of the olympic cauldron by 1996 gold medalist windsurfer nikolaos kaklamanakis. many key moments in the ceremony, including the lighting of the olympic cauldron, featured music composed and arranged by john psathas[25] from new zealand. the gigantic cauldron, which was styled after the athens 2004 olympic torch, pivoted down to be lit by the 35-year-old, before slowly swinging up and lifting the flame high above the stadium. following this, the stadium found itself at the centre of a rousing fireworks spectacular.
all national olympic committees (nocs) participated in the athens games, as was the case in 1996. two new nocs had been created since 1996 and made their debut at these games (kiribati and timor-leste). therefore, with the return of afghanistan (who had been banned from the 2000 summer olympics), the number of participating nations increased from 199 to 202. also since 2000, yugoslavia had changed its name to serbia and montenegro and its code from yug to scg.
in the table below, the number in parentheses indicates the number of participants contributed by each noc.
the sports featured at the 2004 summer olympics are listed below. officially there were 301 events in 28 sports as swimming, diving, synchronised swimming and water polo are classified by the ioc as disciplines within the sport of aquatics, and wheelchair racing was a demonstration sport. for the first time, the wrestling category featured women's wrestling and in the fencing competition women competed in the sabre. american kristin heaston, who led off the qualifying round of women's shot put became the first woman to compete at the ancient site of olympia.
the demonstration sport of wheelchair racing was a joint olympic/paralympic event, allowing a paralympic event to occur within the olympics, and for the future, opening up the wheelchair race to the able-bodied. the 2004 summer paralympics were also held in athens, from 17 to 28 september.




usa men's lightweight coxless four at athens olympics
archery rounds in the panathenaic stadium
roger federer representing switzerland in tennis
russian igor turchin (left) and american weston kelsey (right) duel in second round of men's individual épée
 31 sports
the games were concluded on 29 august 2004. the closing ceremony was held at the athens olympic stadium, where the games had been opened 16 days earlier. around 70,000 people gathered in the stadium to watch the ceremony.
the initial part of the ceremony interspersed the performances of various greek singers, and featured traditional greek dance performances from various regions of greece (crete, pontos, thessaly, etc.). the event was meant to highlight the pride of the greeks in their culture and country for the world to see.
a significant part of the closing ceremony was the exchange of the olympic flag of the athens games between the mayor of athens and the mayor of beijing, host city of the next olympics. after the flag exchange a presentation from the beijing delegation presented a glimpse into chinese culture for the world to see. beijing university students (who were at first incorrectly cited as the twelve girls band) sang mo li hua (jasmine flower) accompanied by a ribbon dancer, then some male dancers did a routine with tai-chi and acrobatics, followed by dancers from the peking opera and finally, a little chinese girl singing a reprise of mo li hua and concluded the presentation by saying "welcome to beijing!"
the medal ceremony for the last event of the olympics, the men's marathon, was conducted, with stefano baldini from italy as the winner. the bronze medal winner, vanderlei cordeiro de lima of brazil, was simultaneously announced as a recipient of the pierre de coubertin medal for his bravery in finishing the race despite being attacked by a rogue spectator while leading with 7 km to go.
a flag-bearer from each nation's delegation then entered along the stage, followed by the competitors en masse on the floor.
short speeches were presented by gianna angelopoulos-daskalaki, president of the organising committee, and by president dr. jacques rogge of the ioc, in which he described the athens olympics as "unforgettable, dream games".[7]
dr. rogge had previously declared he would be breaking with tradition in his closing speech as president of the ioc and that he would never use the words of his predecessor juan antonio samaranch, who used to always say 'these were the best ever games'.[7] dr. rogge had described salt lake city 2002 as "superb games" and in turn would continue after athens 2004 and describe turin 2006 as "truly magnificent games."
the national anthems of greece and china were played in a handover ceremony as both nations' flags were raised. the mayor of athens, dora bakoyianni, passed the olympic flag to the mayor of beijing, wang qishan. after a short cultural performance by chinese actors, dancers, and musicians directed by eminent chinese director zhang yimou, rogge declared the 2004 olympic games closed. the olympic flag was next raised again on 10 february 2006 during the opening ceremony of next winter olympics in torino.
a young greek girl, 10-year-old fotini papaleonidopoulou, lit a symbolic lantern with the olympic flame and passed it on to other children before "extinguishing" the flame in the cauldron by blowing a puff of air. the ceremony ended with a variety of musical performances by greek singers, including dionysis savvopoulos, george dalaras, haris alexiou, anna vissi, sakis rouvas, eleftheria arvanitaki, alkistis protopsalti, antonis remos, michalis hatzigiannis, marinella and dimitra galani, as thousands of athletes carried out symbolic displays on the stadium floor.
these are the top ten nations that won medals in the 2004 games.
  *   host nation (greece)to commemorate the 2004 olympics, a series of greek high value euro collectors' coins were minted by the mint of greece, in both silver and gold. the pieces depict landmarks in greece as well as ancient and modern sports on the obverse of the coin. on the reverse, a common motif with the logo of the games, circled by an olive branch representing the spirit of the games.
preparations to stage the olympics led to a number of positive developments for the city's infrastructure. these improvements included the establishment of eleftherios venizelos international airport, a modern new international airport serving as greece's main aviation gateway;[27] expansions to the athens metro[28] system; the "tram", a new metropolitan tram (light rail) system[29] system; the "proastiakos", a new suburban railway system linking the airport and suburban towns to the city of athens; the "attiki odos", a new toll motorway encircling the city,[30] and the conversion of streets into pedestrianized walkways in the historic center of athens which link several of the city's main tourist sites, including the parthenon and the panathenaic stadium (the site of the first modern olympic games in 1896).[31][32] all of the above infrastructure is still in use to this day, and there have been continued expansions and proposals to expand athens' metro, tram, suburban rail and motorway network, the airport, as well as further plans to pedestrianize more thoroughfares in the historic center of athens.
the greek government has created a corporation, olympic properties sa, which is overseeing the post-olympics management, development and conversion of these facilities, some of which will be sold off (or have already been sold off) to the private sector,[33][34] while some other facilities are still in use, or have been converted for commercial use or modified for other sports.[35]
as of 2012 many conversion schemes have stalled owing to the greek government-debt crisis. the annual cost to maintain the sites has been estimated at £500 million, a sum which has been politically controversial in greece,[36][deprecated source] though many of these facilities are now under the control of domestic sporting clubs and organizations or the private sector.[citation needed]
the table below delineates the current status of the athens olympic facilities:
[52][66][98]
there have been arguments (mostly in popular media) that the cost of the 2004 athens summer games was a contributor to the greek government-debt crisis that started in 2009, with a lot of focus on the use of the facilities after the games.[99] this argument, however, contradicts the fact that greece's debt to gdp ratio was essentially not affected until the 2008 crisis,[100] while the cost of the games, spread over years of preparation, was insignificant compared to greece's public debt and gdp.[101][102] furthermore, the aforementioned arguments do not even take into account the profits (direct and indirect) generated by the games, which may well have surpassed the above costs. finally, popular arguments about "rotting" of many of the facilities, appear to ignore the actual utilization of most of these structures.[102]

the 2008 summer olympics, officially known as the games of the xxix olympiad (chinese: 第二十九届夏季奥林匹克运动会; pinyin: dì èrshíjiǔ jiè xiàjì àolínpǐkè yùndònghuì) and commonly known as beijing 2008, was an international multi-sport event that was held from 8 to 24 august 2008 in beijing, china.[b]
a total of 10,942 athletes from 204 national olympic committees (nocs) competed in 28 sports and 302 events (one event more than those scheduled for the 2004 summer olympics).[2] this was the first time that china had hosted the summer olympics, but the third time that the games had been held in east asia, following the 1964 olympics in tokyo, japan, and the seoul 1988 summer olympics. these were the second summer olympic games staged in a communist country, after the moscow 1980 summer olympics and the third in a developing country after the mexico city 1968 summer olympics and the 1980 summer olympics in the soviet union.
beijing was awarded the 2008 games over four competitors on 13 july 2001, having won a majority of votes from members of the international olympic committee (ioc) after two rounds of voting.[3] the government of the people's republic of china promoted the games and invested heavily in new facilities and transport systems. a total of 37 venues were used to host the events, including twelve constructed specifically for the 2008 olympics. the equestrian events were held in hong kong, making this the third olympics for which the events were held under the jurisdiction of two different nocs.[c] the sailing events were contested in qingdao, while the football events took place across several different cities.
the official logo for the 2008 games, titled "dancing beijing", featured a stylised calligraphic character jīng (京, means capital) in reference to the host city. the beijing olympics was watched by 3,500,000,000 people worldwide and featured the longest distance for an olympic torch relay.[4][5][6][7][8][9] the event sets numerous world and olympics records in the history of sports, and is also the most expensive summer olympics of all time and second-most expensive overall, after the 2014 winter olympics in sochi.[10][11] the opening ceremony was lauded by spectators and numerous international presses as spectacular and spellbinding, and by many accounts "the greatest ever in the history of olympics".[12][13][14]
an unprecedented 87 countries won at least one medal during the games. china won the most gold medals, with 48, and became only the seventh different team to top an overall olympic medal tally, winning a total of 100 medals overall. the united states placed second in the gold medal tally but won the highest number of medals overall, with a total of 112. the third place in the gold medal tally was achieved by russia.
beijing has been selected to host the 2022 winter olympics; it will become the first city ever to host both a summer and winter games.
beijing was elected as the host city for the 2008 summer olympics on 13 july 2001, during the 112th ioc session in moscow, defeating bids from toronto, paris, istanbul, and osaka. prior to the session, five other cities (bangkok, cairo, havana, kuala lumpur, and seville) had submitted bids to the ioc, but failed to make the short list chosen by the ioc executive committee in 2000. after the first round of voting, beijing held a significant lead over the other four candidates. osaka received only six votes and was eliminated. in the second round, beijing was supported by a majority of voters, eliminating the need for subsequent rounds.[15] toronto's bid was their 5th failure since 1960 (failed bid for 1960, 1964, 1976 and 1996 games losing to rome, tokyo, montreal and atlanta).[16]
members of the ioc did not disclose their votes, but news reports speculated that broad international support led to china's selection, especially from developing nations who had received assistance from china in the construction of stadiums. the size of china, its increased enforcement of doping controls, and sympathy concerning its loss of the 2000 summer olympics to sydney were all factors in the decision.[17] eight years earlier, beijing had led every round of voting for the 2000 summer olympics before losing to sydney by two votes in the final round.[18]
human rights concerns expressed by amnesty international and politicians in both europe and the united states were considered by the delegates, according to ioc executive director françois carrard. carrard and others suggested that the selection might lead to improvements in human rights in china. in addition, a number of ioc delegates who had formerly been athletes expressed concern about heat and air quality during the games, considering the high levels of air pollution in beijing. china outlined plans to address these environmental concerns in its bid application.[17]
the oxford olympics study 2016 estimates the outturn cost of the beijing 2008 summer olympics at us$6.8 billion in 2015-dollars and cost overrun at 2% in real terms.[19] this includes sports-related costs only, that is, (i) operational costs incurred by the organizing committee for the purpose of staging the games, e.g., expenditures for technology, transportation, workforce, administration, security, catering, ceremonies, and medical services, and (ii) direct capital costs incurred by the host city and country or private investors to build the competition venues, the olympic village, international broadcast center, and media and press center, which are required to host the games. indirect capital costs are not included, such as for road, rail, or airport infrastructure, or for hotel upgrades or other business investment incurred in preparation for the games but not directly related to staging the games. the beijing olympics' cost of us$6.8 billion compares with costs of us$4.6 billion for rio 2016 and us$15 billion for london 2012. average cost for the summer games since 1960 is us$5.2 billion.
on 6 march 2009, the beijing organizing committee for the olympic games reported that total spending on the games was "generally as much as that of the athens 2004 olympic games", which was equivalent to about us$15 billion. they went on to claim that surplus revenues from the games would exceed the original target of $16 million.[20] other reports, however, estimated the total costs from $40 billion to $44 billion, which would make the games "far and away the most expensive ever".[21][22][23]
its budget has since been exceeded by the 2014 winter olympics in sochi, which suffered from major cost overruns, causing the budget to exceed us$51 billion.[24][25]
canadian solar constructed the 2000m landscape avenue project for the beijing olympic games stadium in 2008.[26]
by may 2007 the construction of all 31 beijing-based olympic games venues had begun.[27] the chinese government renovated and constructed six venues outside beijing as well as 59 training centres. the largest structures built were the beijing national stadium, beijing national indoor stadium, beijing national aquatics center, peking university gymnasium, olympic green convention center, olympic green, and beijing wukesong culture & sports center. almost 85% of the construction budget for the six main venues was funded by $2.1 billion (rmb¥17.4 billion) in corporate bids and tenders. investments were expected from corporations seeking ownership rights after the olympics.[28] some events were held outside beijing, namely football in qinhuangdao, shanghai, shenyang, and tianjin; sailing in qingdao; and, because of the "uncertainties of equine diseases and major difficulties in establishing a disease-free zone", the equestrian events were held in hong kong.[29]
the centrepiece of the 2008 summer olympics was the beijing national stadium, nicknamed "the bird's nest" because of its nest-like skeletal structure.  the stadium hosted both the opening and closing ceremonies as well as the athletics competition.[30] construction of the venue began on 24 december 2003. the guangdong olympic stadium was originally planned, constructed, and completed in 2001 to help host the games, but a decision was made to construct a new stadium in beijing.[31] in 2001, the city held a bidding process to select the best arena design. several criteria were required of each design, including flexibility for post-olympics use, a retractable roof, and low maintenance costs.[32] the entry list was narrowed to thirteen final designs.[33] the bird's nest model submitted by architects jacques herzog and pierre de meuron in collaboration with li xinggang of china architecture design and research group (cadg) was selected as the top design by both a professional panel and by a broader audience during a public exhibition. the selection of the design became official in april 2003.[32] construction of the stadium was a joint venture among the original designers, project architect stefan marbach, artist ai weiwei, and a group of cadg architects led by li xinggang. its $423 million cost was funded by the state-owned corporate conglomerate citic and the beijing state-owned assets management company.[32][34]
the 2008 beijing olympics caused traditional hutong neighborhoods to be cleared for the construction of modern olympic stadiums. in an effort to ensure success for the games, the government invested billions in building new infrastructure, although clearance to tiny, outdated neighborhoods in beijing called hutongs resulted (petrun). jim yardley, a new york times reporter interviews pan jinyu, a 64-year-old local resident: "they [the government] don't want foreigners to see this scarred old face". feng shuqin and her husband, zheng zhanlin have lived in their house for 50 years and the family has owned the property before the communists took control in 1949. the government, trying to clear the area, has offered them to move with a compensatory sum of us$175,000, but the family insists the land is worth us$1.4 million (yardley). michael meyer, an american who lives in the hutongs reported that a total of 500,000 residents were relocated from their homes before the olympics began (meyer).
to prepare for olympic visitors, beijing's transportation infrastructure was expanded. beijing's airport underwent a major renovation with the addition of the new terminal 3, designed by architect norman foster.[35] within the city itself, beijing's subway was doubled in capacity and length, with the addition of 7 lines and 80 stations to the previously existing 4 lines and 64 stations. included in this expansion was a new link connecting to the city's airport. a fleet of thousands of buses, minibuses, and official cars transported spectators, athletes, and officials between venues.[36][37]
in an effort to improve air quality, the city placed restrictions on construction sites and gas stations, and limited the use of commercial and passenger vehicles in beijing.[38] from 20 july through 20 september, passenger vehicle restrictions were placed on alternative days depending on the terminal digit of the car's license plate. it was anticipated that this measure would take 45% of beijing's 3.3 million cars off the streets. the boosted public transport network was expected to absorb the demand created by these restrictions and the influx of visitors, which was estimated at more than 4 million additional passengers per day.[39]
the 2008 summer olympics emblem was known as dancing beijing. the emblem combined a traditional chinese red seal and a representation of the calligraphic character jīng (京, "national capital", also the second character of beijing's chinese name) with athletic features. the open arms of the calligraphic word symbolized the invitation from china to the world to share in its culture. ioc president jacques rogge was very happy with the emblem, saying, "your new emblem immediately conveys the awesome beauty and power of china which are embodied in your heritage and your people."[40]
the official motto for the 2008 olympics was "one world, one dream" (同一个世界 同一个梦想).[41] it called upon the whole world to join in the olympic spirit and build a better future for humanity, and was chosen from over 210,000 entries submitted from around the world.[42] following the announcement of the motto, the phrase was used by international advocates of tibetan secession. banners reading "one world, one dream, free tibet" were unfurled from various structures around the globe in the lead up to the beijing olympics, such as from the san francisco golden gate bridge and the sydney opera house in australia.[43]
the mascots of beijing 2008 were the five fuwa, each representing both a colour of the olympic rings and a symbol of chinese culture.  in 2006, the beijing organizing committee released pictograms of 35 olympic disciplines (for some multi-discipline sports, such as cycling, a single pictogram was released).[44][45] this set of sport icons was named the beauty of seal characters, because of each pictogram's likeness to chinese seal script.[45]
the 2008 games were the first to be produced and broadcast entirely in high definition by the host broadcaster.[46] in comparison, american broadcaster nbc broadcast only half of the turin 2006 winter olympics in hd.[47][48] in their bid for the olympic games in 2001, beijing stated to the olympic evaluation commission that there would be "no restrictions on media reporting and movement of journalists up to and including the olympic games."[49] however, some media outlets claimed that organizers ultimately failed to live up to this commitment.[d]
according to nielsen media research, 4.7 billion viewers worldwide tuned into some of the television coverage, one-fifth larger than the 3.9 billion who watched the 2004 olympic games in athens.  american broadcaster nbc produced only 2 hours of online streaming video for the 2006 winter games but produced approximately 2,200 hours of coverage for the 2008 summer games. cnn reported that, for the first time, "live online video rights in some markets for the olympics have been separately negotiated, not part of the overall 'broadcast rights.'" the new media of the digital economy was said to be growing "nine times faster than the rest of the advertising market."[51]
the international european broadcasting union (ebu) provided live coverage and highlights of all arenas only for certain territories on their website, eurovisionsports.tv.[52] many national broadcasters likewise restricted the viewing of online events to their domestic audiences.[53] the general national copyright administration of china announced that "individual (sic) and websites will face fines as high as 100,000 yuan for uploading recordings of olympic games video to the internet",[54] part of an extensive campaign to protect the pertinent intellectual property rights.[55][56] the olympic committee also set up a separate youtube channel at beijing 2008.[57]
the theme song of the 2008 summer olympics was "you and me," which was composed by chen qigang, the musical director of the opening ceremony. it was performed during the opening ceremony by chinese singer liu huan and british singer sarah brightman.[58][59]
the design of the 2008 olympic torch was based on traditional scrolls and used a traditional chinese design known as the "propitious clouds" (祥云). the torch was designed to remain lit in 65 km/h (40 mph) winds, and in rain of up to 50 mm (2 in) per hour.[60]
the relay, with the theme "journey of harmony", was met with protests and demonstrations by pro-tibet supporters throughout its journey. it lasted 130 days and carried the torch 137,000 km (85,000 mi)—the longest distance of any olympic torch relay since the tradition began at the 1936 berlin games.[61][62] the torch relay was described as a "public relations disaster" for china by usa today,[63] with protests against china's human rights record, particularly focused on tibet. the ioc subsequently barred future olympics organizers from staging international torch relays.[64]
the relay began 24 march 2008, in olympia, greece. from there, it traveled across greece to panathinaiko stadium in athens, and then to beijing, arriving on 31 march. from beijing, the torch followed a route passing through every continent except antarctica. the torch visited cities on the silk road, symbolizing ancient links between china and the rest of the world. a total of 21,880 torchbearers were selected from around the world by various organizations and entities.[65]
the international portion of the relay was problematic. the month-long world tour encountered wide-scale anti-chinese protests. after trouble in london involving attempts by protesters to put out the flame, the torch was extinguished in paris the following day.[66] the american leg in san francisco on 9 april was altered without prior warning to avoid such disturbances, although there were still demonstrations along the original route.[67] the relay was further delayed and simplified after the 2008 sichuan earthquake hit western china.[68]
the flame was carried to the top of mount everest[65] on a 108 km (67 mi) long "highway" scaling the tibetan side of the mountain, built especially for the relay. the $19.7 million blacktop project spanned from tingri county of xigazê prefecture to the everest base camp.[69] in march 2008, china banned mountaineers from climbing its side of mount everest, and later persuaded the nepalese government to close their side as well, officially citing environmental concerns.[70] it also reflected concerns by the chinese government that tibet activists may try to disrupt its plans to carry the olympic torch up the world's tallest peak.[71]
the originally proposed route would have taken the torch through taipei after leaving vietnam and before heading for hong kong. however, the government of taiwan (then led by the independence-leaning democratic progressive party) objected to this proposal, claiming that this route would make the portion of the relay in taiwan appear to be part of the torch's domestic journey through china, rather than a leg on the international route.[72] this dispute, as well as chinese demands that the flag and the national anthem of the republic of china be banned along the route led the government of taiwan to reject the proposal that it be part of the relay route, and the two sides of the taiwan strait subsequently blamed each other for injecting politics into the event.[73]
in the following calendar for the 2008 summer olympics, each blue box represents an event competition, such as a qualification round, on that day. the yellow boxes represent days during which medal-awarding finals for a sport were held. each bullet in these boxes is an event final, the number of bullets per box representing the number of finals that were contested on that day. on the left the calendar lists each sport with events held during the games, and at the right how many gold medals were won in that sport. there is a key at the top of the calendar to aid the reader.[74]

125 olympic records including 37 world records were set in various events at the games. in swimming, sixty-five olympic swimming records including 25 world records were broken due to the use of the lzr racer, a specialized swimming suit developed by nasa and the australian institute of sport.[75] only two swimming olympic records remained intact after the games.
the opening ceremony officially began at 8:00 pm china standard time (utc+8) on 8 august 2008 in the beijing national stadium.[76] the number 8 is associated with prosperity and confidence in chinese culture, and here it was a triple eight for the date and one extra for time (close to 08:08:08 pm).[77] the ceremony was co-directed by chinese filmmaker zhang yimou and chinese choreographer zhang jigang[78] and featured a cast of over 15,000 performers.[79] the ceremony lasted over four hours and was reported to have cost over us$100 million to produce.[80] un secretary general ban ki-moon and leaders from 95 countries attended this ceremony.
a rich assembly of ancient chinese art and culture dominated the ceremony. it opened with the beating of fou drums for the countdown. subsequently, a giant scroll was unveiled and became the show's centerpiece. the official song of the 2008 olympics, titled "you and me", was performed by britain's sarah brightman and china's liu huan, on a large spinning rendition of the globe.[81] the last recipient in the olympic torch relay, former chinese gymnast li ning ignited the cauldron, after being suspended into the air by wires and completing a lap of the national stadium at roof height.[82]
the opening ceremony was lauded by spectators and various international presses as "spectacular" and "spellbinding".[83] hein verbruggen, chairman of the ioc coordination commission for the xxix olympiad, called the ceremony "a grand, unprecedented success."[84]
the program for the beijing games was quite similar to that of the 2004 summer olympics held in athens. there were 28 sports and 302 events at the 2008 games.  nine new events were held, including two from the new cycling discipline of bmx. women competed in the 3000 metre steeplechase for the first time. open water swimming events for men and women, over the distance of 10 kilometres (6.2 mi), were added to the swimming discipline. team events (men and women) in table tennis replaced the doubles events.[85] in fencing, women's team foil and women's team sabre replaced men's team foil and women's team épée.[e] two sports were open only to men, baseball and boxing, while one sport and one discipline were open only to women, softball and synchronized swimming. equestrian and mixed badminton are the only sports in which men and women compete together, although three events in the sailing allowed the opportunity for both males and female participants. however, only male participants took part in all three events.[87][88]
the following were the 302 events in 28 sports that were contested at the games. the number of events contested in each sport is indicated in parentheses (in sports with more than one discipline, as identified by the ioc,[89] these are also specified).
in addition to the official olympic sports, the beijing organising committee was given special dispensation by the ioc to run a wushu competition in parallel to the games. the wushu tournament beijing 2008 saw 128 athletes from 43 countries participate, with medals awarded in 15 separate events; however, these were not to be added to the official medal tally since wushu was not on the programme of the 2008 summer olympics.[90]
the 2008 summer olympics closing ceremony concluded the beijing games on 24 august 2008. it began at 8:00 pm china standard time (utc+8), and took place at the beijing national stadium.
the ceremony included handover of the games from beijing to london. guo jinlong, the mayor of beijing handed over the olympic flag to the mayor of london boris johnson, followed by a performance organized by the london organising committee of the olympic games and paralympic games (locog).  this presentation included performances by guitarist jimmy page, and recording artist leona lewis.  footballer david beckham was also featured during london's presentation.[91]
of the 204 nations that participated in the 2008 games, 87 earned medals and 54 of those won at least one gold medal, both of these figures setting new records for olympic games.[92][93] there were 117 participating countries that did not win any medals. athletes from china won the highest number of gold medals of any nation at these games, with 48, thus making china the seventh nation to rank top in the medal table in the history of the modern olympics, along with the united states (fifteen times), france (in 1900), great britain (in 1908), germany (in 1936), the soviet union (six times), and the unified team (in 1992).[92]
the united states team won the most medals overall, with 112. afghanistan,[94] mauritius,[95] sudan,[96] tajikistan[97] and togo[98] won their first ever olympic medals. mongolia (which previously held the record for most medals without a gold)[99] and panama[100] won their first gold medals. four members of the water polo team from serbia won the first medal for their country under its new name, having previously won medals representing yugoslavia and serbia and montenegro.[101]
american swimmer michael phelps won a total of eight gold medals, more than any other athlete in a single olympic games, setting numerous world and olympic records in the process.[92] jamaican sprinter usain bolt also set records in several different events, completing the 100 m final with a time of 9.69 seconds, beating his own previous world record.[102] russian-born american gymnast nastia liukin won the all-around gold medal in artistic gymnastics, becoming the third american female to do so, following in the footsteps of mary lou retton in 1984 and carly patterson in 2004.[103]
these are the top ten nations that won medals in the 2008 games.
     host nation
all but one of the 205 recognized national olympic committees (nocs) that existed as of 2008[update]  participated in the 2008 summer olympics, the exception being brunei.[104] three countries participated in the olympic games for their first time: the marshall islands, montenegro and tuvalu.[105]
while not a full member recognized by the ioc and thus not allowed to compete formally in the olympics, the macau sports and olympic committee sent a delegation to participate in the wushu tournament beijing 2008, being the only unrecognized national olympic committee to have taken part in the 2008 summer olympics. it also coordinated efforts with the chinese olympic committee to organize the torch relay through macau.
the marshall islands and tuvalu gained national olympic committee status in 2006 and 2007 respectively, and 2008 was the first games in which they were eligible to participate.[106][107] the states of serbia and montenegro, which participated at the 2004 games jointly as serbia and montenegro, competed separately for the first time. the montenegrin olympic committee was accepted as a new national olympic committee in 2007.[107] neighboring kosovo, however, did not participate. after the declaration of independence in kosovo, the ioc specified requirements that kosovo needs to meet before being recognized by the ioc; most notably, it has to be recognized as independent by the united nations.[108][109][110]
more than 100 sovereigns, heads of state and heads of government as well as 170 ministers of sport attended the beijing olympic games.[111]
athletes from the republic of china (taiwan) competed at the 2008 games as chinese taipei (tpe) under the chinese taipei olympic flag and used the national banner song as their official anthem. the participation of taiwan was briefly in doubt because of disagreements over the name of their team in the chinese language and concerns about taiwan marching in the opening ceremony next to the special administrative region of hong kong. a compromise on the naming was reached, and taiwan was referred to during the games as "chinese taipei," rather than "taipei, china," as the mainland china government had proposed. in addition, the central african republic was placed between chinese taipei and the special administrative regions during the march of nations.[112]
starting in 2005, north korea and south korea held meetings to discuss the possibility of sending a united team to the 2008 olympics.[113][114] the proposal failed, because of disagreements about how athletes would be chosen; north korea was demanding a certain percentage representation for its athletes. a subsequent attempt to broker an agreement for the two nations to walk together during the march of nations failed as well, despite their having done so during the 2000 and 2004 games.[115]
on 24 july 2008, the international olympic committee (ioc) banned iraq from competing in the 2008 olympic summer games because of "political interference by the government in sports."[116][117] the ioc reversed its decision five days later and allowed the nation to compete after a pledge by iraq to ensure "the independence of its national olympics panel" by instituting fair elections before the end of november. in the meantime, iraq's olympic organisation was run by "an interim committee proposed by its national sports federations and approved by the ioc."[118]
brunei darussalam was due to take part in the 2008 summer olympic games. however, they were disqualified on 8 august, having failed to register either of their two athletes.[119] the ioc spokeswoman emmanuelle moreau said in a statement that "it is a great shame and very sad for the athletes who lose out because of the decision by their team not to register them. the ioc tried up until the last minute, midday friday 8 august 2008, the day of the official opening, to have them register, but to no avail."[120] brunei's ministry of culture, youth and sports issued a press release stating that their decision not to participate was due to an injury to one of their athletes.[121]
georgia announced on 9 august 2008, that it was considering withdrawing from the beijing olympic games because of the 2008 south ossetia war, but it went on to compete while the conflict was still ongoing.[122]
south african swimmer natalie du toit, whose left leg was amputated following a motor scooter accident, qualified to compete at the beijing olympics. the five time gold medalist at the athens paralympics in 2004 made history by becoming the first amputee to qualify for the olympic games since olivér halassy in 1936. she was able to compete in the olympics rather than the paralympics because she does not use a prosthetic leg while swimming.[123] polish athlete natalia partyka, who was born without a right forearm, competed in table tennis in the 2008 summer olympics and 2008 paralympic games.[124]
a variety of concerns over the games, or china's hosting of the games, had been expressed by various entities, including claims that china violated its pledge to allow open media access,[125] various supposed human rights violations,[126][127] its alleged continuous support of repressive regimes (such as zimbabwe, myanmar, sudan and north korea), air pollution in both the city of beijing and in neighbouring areas,[128] proposed boycotts,[129][130] warnings of the possibility that the beijing olympics could be targeted by terrorist groups,[131] disruption from pro-tibetan protesters,[132] and religious persecutions.[133]
there were also claims that several members of china's women's gymnastics team, including double gold medal winner he kexin, were too young to compete under the fédération internationale de gymnastique's rules for olympic eligibility, but all were exonerated after an official ioc investigation.[134][135][136]
collectively, the beijing olympics are associated with a variety of problematic topics: the ecological impact, residential displacement due to construction, treatment of migrant workers, the government's political stance on tibet, etc.[137] in the lead-up to the olympics, the government allegedly issued guidelines to the local media for their reporting during the games: most political issues not directly related to the games were to be downplayed; topics such as pro-tibetan independence and east turkestan movements were not to be reported on, as were food safety issues such as "cancer-causing mineral water".[138] as the 2008 chinese milk scandal broke in september 2008, there was widespread speculation that china's desire for a perfect games may have been a factor contributing towards the delayed recall of contaminated infant formula.[139][140]
the games were hit by a number of doping scandals before and after the games had commenced. seven russian track and field stars were suspended just before the start of the games for allegedly tampering with their urine samples, only five of the seven were due to take part in the games. eleven greek weightlifters also failed tests in the run up to the games and the entire bulgarian weightlifting team had to withdraw after eleven of their weightlifters also failed tests. a small number of athletes from other nations also failed pre-games tests.[141][142][143] urine samples taken from the games were re-analysed in 2016–17 using more advanced technologies that were not available at the time of competition. 61 athletes failed these re-tests, with 50 medals being stripped.[citation needed]
the 2008 summer olympics have been generally accepted by the world's media as a logistical success.[144][145] many of the worst fears about the games failed to materialize: no terrorists struck beijing; no athlete protested at the podium (though swedish wrestler ara abrahamian tossed his bronze medal in disgust over judging), and the air quality – due largely to favorable weather patterns – was not as bad as many had feared beforehand despite being the worst in olympics history.[146][147] hopes that hosting the games would lead to improvements in human rights protections and rule of law in china, however, went unfulfilled.[148]
many in china viewed the olympics as "an affirmation of a single nationalistic dream" and saw protests during the international torch relay as an insult to china.[149] the games also bolstered domestic support for the chinese government, and for the policies of the communist party, giving rise to concerns that the olympics would give the state more leverage to suppress political dissent, at least temporarily.[150] efforts to quell any unrest before and during the games also contributed to a rapid expansion in the size and political clout of china's internal security forces, and this growth continued through the following years.[151] reports also indicated that the olympics boosted the political careers of pro-beijing politicians in hong kong, as many chinese gold medal winners campaigned on behalf of the pro-beijing dab during the 2008 election,[152] although any trend towards greater identification by hong kongers with mainland china appears to have been short-lived.[153]
the long-term economic impact of the games on china and beijing in particular is not yet clear. some sectors of the economy may have benefited from the influx of tourists, and other sectors such as manufacturing lost revenue because of plant closings related to the government's efforts to improve air quality. four years after the games, many of the specially constructed facilities were underused or even deserted.[154]  it is generally expected by economists that there will be no lasting effects on beijing's economy from the games.[155]
one 2009 study found that countries which host the olympics experience a significant boost in trade.  but this is also the case for countries which merely bid to host.  "the benefit, in other words, came from the signal that a country was open for business, not from the spending itself."
[156]
seven years after the 2008 games, beijing was awarded the 2022 winter olympics. it will thus be the first city to host both the summer and winter games.


the 2012 summer olympics, formally the games of the xxx olympiad[3] and commonly known as london 2012, was an international multi-sport event that was held from 27 july to 12 august 2012 in london, united kingdom. the first event, the group stage in women's football, began on 25 july at the millennium stadium in cardiff, followed by the opening ceremony on 27 july.[4][5] 10,768 athletes from 204 national olympic committees (nocs) participated.[6]
following a bid headed by former olympic champion sebastian coe and then-mayor of london ken livingstone, london was selected as the host city on 6 july 2005 during the 117th ioc session in singapore, defeating bids from moscow, new york city, madrid, and paris.[7] london became the first city to host the modern olympics three times,[8][9] having previously hosted the summer games in 1908 and in 1948.[10][11]
construction for the games involved considerable redevelopment, with an emphasis on sustainability.[12] the main focus was a new 200-hectare (490-acre) olympic park, constructed on a former industrial site at stratford, east london.[13] the games also made use of venues that already existed before the bid.[14]
the games received general praise for their organisation, with the volunteers, the british military and public enthusiasm praised particularly highly.[15][16][17] the opening ceremony, directed by danny boyle, received widespread acclaim throughout the world, particular praise from the british public and a minority of widely ranging criticisms from some social media sites.[18][19] during the games, michael phelps became the most decorated olympic athlete of all time, winning his 22nd medal.[20] saudi arabia, qatar, and brunei entered female athletes for the first time, so that every currently eligible country has sent a female competitor to at least one olympic games.[21] women's boxing was included for the first time, thus the games became the first at which every sport had female competitors.[22][23][24] these were the final olympic games under the ioc presidency of belgian jacques rogge, who was succeeded by german thomas bach the next year.
the final medal tally was led by the united states, followed by china and host great britain. several world and olympic records were set at the games. though there were several controversies, the 2012 games were deemed highly successful with the rising standards of competition amongst nations across the world, packed stadiums and smooth organisation. furthermore, the focus on sporting legacy and post-games venue sustainability was seen as a blueprint for future olympics.
by 15 july 2003, the deadline for interested cities to submit bids to the international olympic committee (ioc), nine cities had submitted bids to host the 2012 summer olympics: havana, istanbul, leipzig, london, madrid, moscow, new york city, paris, and rio de janeiro.[25] on 18 may 2004, as a result of a scored technical evaluation, the ioc reduced the number of cities to five: london, madrid, moscow, new york and paris.[26] all five submitted their candidate files by 19 november 2004 and were visited by the ioc inspection team during february and march 2005. the paris bid suffered two setbacks during the ioc inspection visit: a number of strikes and demonstrations coinciding with the visits, and a report that a key member of the bid team, guy drut, would face charges over alleged corrupt party political finances.[27]
throughout the process, paris was widely seen as the favourite, particularly as this was its third bid in recent years. london was initially seen as lagging behind paris by a considerable margin.[28] its position began to improve after the appointment of lord coe as the new head of london 2012 on 19 may 2004.[29] in late august 2004, reports predicted a tie between london and paris.[30]
on 6 june 2005, the ioc released its evaluation reports for the five candidate cities. they did not contain any scores or rankings, but the report for paris was considered the most positive. london was close behind, having closed most of the gap observed by the initial evaluation in 2004. new york and madrid also received very positive evaluations.[31] on 1 july 2005, when asked who would win, jacques rogge said, "i cannot predict it since i don't know how the ioc members will vote. but my gut feeling tells me that it will be very close. perhaps it will come down to a difference of say ten votes, or maybe less."[32]
on 6 july 2005, the final selection was announced at the 117th ioc session in singapore. moscow was the first city to be eliminated, followed by new york and madrid. the final two contenders were london and paris. at the end of the fourth round of voting, london won the right to host the 2012 games with 54 votes to 50.[33]
tragically, the celebrations in london were short-lived, being overshadowed by bombings on london's transport system less than 24 hours after the announcement.[34]
the london organising committee of the olympic games (locog) was created to oversee the staging of the games after the success of the bid, and held its first board meeting on 3 october 2005.[35] the committee, chaired by lord coe, was in charge of implementing and staging the games, while the olympic delivery authority (oda) was in charge of the construction of the venues and infrastructure.[35] the latter was established in april 2006.[36]
the government olympic executive (goe), a unit within the department for culture, media and sport (dcms), was the lead government body for coordinating the london 2012 olympics. it focused on oversight of the games, cross-programme programme management and the london 2012 olympic legacy before and after the games that would benefit london and the united kingdom. the organisation was also responsible for the supervision of the £9.3 billion of public sector funding.[37]
in august 2011, security concerns arose surrounding the hosting of the olympic games in london[38] due to the 2011 england riots, with a few countries expressing fear over the safety of the games,[39] in spite of the international olympic committee's assurance that the riots would not affect the games.[40]
the ioc's coordination commission for the 2012 games completed its tenth and final visit to london in march 2012. its members concluded that "london is ready to host the world this summer".[41]
the 2012 olympic and paralympic games used a mixture of new venues, existing and historic facilities, and temporary facilities, some of them in well-known locations such as hyde park and horse guards parade. after the games, some of the new facilities will be reused in their olympic form, while others will be resized or relocated.[42]
the majority of venues have been divided into three zones within greater london: the olympic zone, the river zone and the central zone. in addition there are a few venues that, by necessity, are outside the boundaries of greater london, such as the weymouth and portland national sailing academy some 125 mi (201 km) southwest of london, which hosted the sailing events. the football tournament was staged at several grounds around the uk.[43] work began on the park in december 2006, when a sports hall in eton manor was pulled down.[44] the athletes' village in portland was completed in september 2011.[45]
in november 2004, the 200-hectare (500-acre) olympic park plans were revealed.[46] the plans for the site were approved in september 2004 by tower hamlets, newham, hackney and waltham forest.[47] the redevelopment of the area to build the olympic park required compulsory purchase orders of property. the london development agency was in dispute with london and continental railways about the orders in november 2005. by may 2006, 86% of the land had been bought as businesses fought eviction.[48] residents who opposed the eviction tried to find ways to stop it by setting up campaigns, but they had to leave as 94% of land was bought and the other 6% bought as a £9 billion regeneration project started.[49]
there were some issues with the original venues not being challenging enough or being financially unviable. both the olympic road races and the mountain bike event were initially considered to be too easy, so they were eventually scheduled on new locations.[50][51] the olympic marathon course, which was set to finish in the olympic stadium, was moved to the mall, since closing tower bridge was deemed to cause traffic problems in central london.[52] north greenwich arena 2 was scrapped in a cost-cutting exercise, wembley arena being used for badminton and rhythmic gymnastics events instead.[53][54][55][56]
test events were held throughout 2011 and 2012, either through an existing championship such as 2012 wimbledon championships or as a specially created event held under the banner of london prepares.[57]
team gb house was the british olympic association's operational hq up to and during the 2012 olympic and paralympic games. designed by architects gebler tooth on the top floor of an office building in westfield stratford city, it combined the team hq, athletes' "friends and family" lounge, press centre and vip lounge.
london's public transport scored poorly in the ioc's initial evaluation; however, it felt that, if the improvements were delivered in time for the games, london would cope.[58] transport for london (tfl) carried out numerous improvements in preparation for 2012, including the expansion of the london overground's east london line, upgrades to the docklands light railway and the north london line, and the introduction of a new "javelin" high-speed rail service.[59] according to network rail, an additional 4,000 train services operated during the games, and train operators ran longer trains during the day.[60] during the games, stratford international station was not served by any international services (just as it had not been before the games),[61] westbound trains did not stop at hackney wick railway station,[62] and pudding mill lane dlr station closed entirely during the games.[63]
tfl also built a £25 million cable car across the river thames, called the emirates air line, to link 2012 olympics venues.[64] it was inaugurated in june 2012 and crosses the thames between greenwich peninsula and the royal docks, carrying up to 2,500 passengers an hour, cutting journey times between the o2 arena and the excel exhibition centre and providing a crossing every 30 seconds.[65]
the plan was to have 80% of athletes travel less than 20 minutes to their event[66] and 93% of them within 30 minutes of their event.[67] the olympic park would be served by ten separate railway lines with a combined capacity of 240,000 passengers per hour.[68] in addition, locog planned for 90% of the venues to be served by three or more types of public transport.[67] two park-and-ride sites off the m25 with a combined capacity of 12,000 cars were 25 minutes away from the olympic park. another park-and-ride site was planned in ebbsfleet with a capacity for 9,000 cars where spectators could board a 10-minute shuttle train service.[67] to get spectators to eton dorney, four park-and-ride schemes were set up.[69]
tfl defined a network of roads leading between venues as the olympic route network; roads connecting between all of the olympic venues located within london. many of these roads also contained special "olympic lanes" marked with the olympic rings—reserved for the use of olympic athletes, officials, and other vips during the games. members of the public driving in an olympic lane were subject to a fine of £130. additionally, london buses would not include roads with olympic lanes on their routes.[70][71][72] the painting of olympic lane indicators in mid-july led to confusion from commuters, who wrongly believed that the olympic lane restrictions had already taken effect (they were to take effect on 27 july). the a4 experienced traffic jams due to drivers avoiding the olympic lane, and likewise on a section of southampton row, where the only lanes available in one direction were the olympic lane and the bus lane.[73]
concerns were expressed at the logistics of spectators travelling to the events outside london. in particular, the sailing events at portland had no direct motorway connections, and local roads are heavily congested by tourist traffic in the summer.[74] however, a £77 million relief road connecting weymouth to dorchester was built and opened in 2011.[75][76] some £16 million was put aside for the rest of the improvements.[77]
tfl created a promotional campaign and website, get ahead of the games, to help provide information related to transport during the olympics and paralympics. through the campaign, tfl also encouraged the use of cycling as a mode of transport during the games.[78] however, despite this encouragement to use bicycles, members of the public protested that riding bikes on london roads would be more dangerous due to the blocked olympic lanes, and also protested against a decision to close the lea valley towpath during the olympics and paralympics due to security concerns.[72]
the 2012 games were a unique operational task and a massive challenge for heathrow airport.[citation needed] a temporary terminal was created at heathrow airport, to be used by 10,100 departing athletes after the games. up to 35% more bags than normal were expected on 13 august, which was predicted to be the busiest day in the airport's history, according to nick cole, head of olympic and paralympic planning at heathrow.[citation needed]
a study from oxford university found that the sports-related costs of london 2012 was us$15 billion, compared to $4.6 billion for rio 2016, $40–44 billion for beijing 2008 and $51 billion for sochi 2014, the most expensive olympics in history. london 2012 went over budget by 76% in real terms, measured from bid to completion. cost per athlete was $1.4 million.[79] this does not include wider costs for urban and transport infrastructure, which often cost as much or more than the sports-related costs.
the costs of mounting the games were separate from those for building the venues and infrastructure, and redeveloping the land for the olympic park. while the games were privately funded, the venues and park costs were met largely by public money.
according to the wall street journal, the original budget for the games was increased to about £9.3 billion (us$15.28 billion) in 2007.[80] the revised figures were announced to the house of commons on 15 march 2007 by tessa jowell. along with east end regeneration costs, the breakdown was:
unpaid volunteers known as games makers performed a variety of tasks before and during the games.[81] a target of 70,000 volunteers was set as early as 2004.[82] when recruitment took place in 2010, over 240,000 applications were received.[83] sebastian coe said in february 2012, "our games makers will contribute a total of around eight million volunteer hours during the games and the games simply wouldn't happen without them".[84] the volunteers wore clothing which included purple and red polo shirts and jackets, beige trousers, grey socks and grey-and-white trainers which they collected from the uniform distribution and accreditation centre. volunteers also wore photo accreditation badges which were also worn by officials, athletes, family members and media which gain them access to specific venues and buildings around the site.
organisers estimated that some 8 million tickets would be available for the olympic games,[85] and 1.5 million tickets for the paralympic games.[85] locog aimed to raise £375–£400 million in ticket sales. there were also free events such as marathon, triathlon and road cycling,[86] although, for the first time in olympic history, the sailing events were ticketed.[87] eventually, more than 7,000,000 tickets were sold.[88] following ioc rules, people applied for tickets from the noc of their country of residence. european union residents were able to apply for tickets in any eu country.[89]
in great britain, ticket prices ranged from £20 for many events to £2,012 for the most expensive seats at the opening ceremony. some free tickets were given to military personnel as part of the tickets for troops scheme,[90] as well as to survivors and families of those who died during 7 july 2005 london bombings.[91] initially, people were able to apply for tickets via a website from 15 march until 26 april 2011. there was a huge demand for tickets, with a demand of over three times the number of tickets available. the process was widely criticised as more than 50% of the sessions went to a random ballot,[92] and over half the people who applied got no tickets.[93] on 11 may 2012 a round of nearly one million "second chance" tickets went on sale over a 10-day period between 23 june and 3 july 2011.[94] about 1.7 million tickets were available for football and 600,000 for other sports, including archery, field hockey, football, judo, boxing and volleyball. although technical difficulties were encountered, ten sports had sold out by 8 am of the first day.[95]
during the closing ceremony of the 2008 olympics, the olympic flag was formally handed over from the mayor of beijing to the mayor of london. this was followed by a section highlighting london,[96] one month later, the olympic and paralympic flags were raised outside the london city hall.[97]
a countdown clock in trafalgar square was unveiled, 500 days before the games.[98] the clock broke down the following day,[99] but was later fixed. it was a two-sided clock with the paralympic countdown on the other side.
the countdown to the start of the olympics began with a ceremony for the lighting of the olympic flame in olympia, greece.[100]
the security operation was led by the police, with 10,000 officers available, supported by 13,500 members of the armed forces. naval and air assets, including ships situated in the thames, eurofighter jets and surface-to-air missiles, were deployed as part of the security operation; the biggest security operation britain had faced for decades. the cost of security increased from £282 million to £553 million, and the figure of 13,500 armed forces personnel was more than britain currently had deployed in afghanistan.[101] the metropolitan police and the royal marines carried out security exercises in preparation for the olympics on 19 january 2012, with 50 marine police officers in rigid inflatables and fast response boats, joined by up to 100 military personnel and a lynx navy helicopter.[102]
the ministry of defence distributed leaflets to residents of the lexington building in bow, announcing that a missile system was to be stationed on top of the water tower.[103][104] this caused concern to some residents.[103][104] the ministry said it probably would use starstreak missiles and that site evaluations had taken place, but that no final decision had taken place.[103][104]
approximately 4,700[105] olympic and paralympic medals were produced by the royal mint at llantrisant.[106] they were designed by david watkins (olympics) and lin cheung (paralympics).[107] 99% of the gold, silver and copper was donated by rio tinto from a mine in salt lake county, utah in the u.s.[108] the remaining 1% came from a mongolian mine.[109] each medal weighs 375–400 g (13.2–14.1 oz), has a diameter of 85 mm (3.3 in) and is 7 mm (0.28 in) thick, with the sport and discipline engraved on the rim.[110] the obverse, as is traditional, features nike, the greek goddess of victory, stepping from the panathinaiko stadium that hosted the first modern olympic games in 1896, with parthenon in the background; the reverse features the games logo, the river thames and a series of lines representing "the energy of athletes and a sense of pulling together".[111] the medals were transferred to the tower of london vaults on 2 july 2012 for storage.[110]
each gold medal is made up of 92.5 percent silver and 1.34 percent gold, with the remainder copper. the silver medal (which represents second place) is made up of 92.5 percent silver, with the remainder copper. the bronze medal is made up of 97 percent copper, 2.5 percent zinc and 0.5 percent tin.[112] the value of the materials in the gold medal is about £410 (us$644), the silver about £210 (us$330), and the bronze about £3 (us$4.71) as of 30 july 2012.[113]
the olympics torch relay ran from 19 may to 27 july 2012, before the games. plans for the relay were developed in 2010–11, with the torch-bearer selection process announced on 18 may 2011.[114]
on 18 may 2012 the olympic flame arrived at rnas culdrose in cornwall from greece[115] on flight ba2012, operated by a british airways airbus a319 named "firefly". on the flight the flame was carried inside 4 miners lamps supplied by protector lamp of eccles, greater manchester.
the relay lasted 70 days, with 66 evening celebrations and six island visits, and involved some 8,000 people carrying the torch about 8,000 mi (12,875 km), starting from land's end in cornwall.[116] the torch had three days outside the united kingdom when it visited the isle of man on 2 june, dublin in ireland, on 6 june,[117] and both guernsey and jersey on 15 july.
the relay focused on national heritage sites, locations with sporting significance, key sporting events, schools registered with the get set school network, green spaces and biodiversity, live sites (city locations with large screens), and festivals and other events.[118] dumfries and galloway was the only region in the whole of the united kingdom that had the olympic torch pass through it twice. a group of young athletes, nominated by retired olympic athletes, ran the torch around the stadium.  these torchbearers were callum airlie, jordan duckitt, desiree henry, katie kirk, cameron macritchie, aidan reynolds, and adelle tracey. together the torchbearers each lit a petal which spread the fire to the 204 petals of the cauldron, representing the countries that participated in the games.[119]
the olympic park was planned to incorporate 45 hectares of wildlife habitat, with a total of 525 bird boxes, and 150 bat boxes. local waterways and riverbanks were enhanced as part of the process.[120] renewable energy also features at the olympics. it was originally planned to provide 20% of the energy for the olympic park and village from renewable technologies; however, this may now be as little as 9%.[121][needs update] proposals to meet the original target included large-scale on-site wind turbines and hydroelectric generators in the river thames. these plans were scrapped for safety reasons.[122] the focus has since moved to installing solar panels on some buildings, and providing the opportunity to recover energy from waste. food packaging at the olympics is made from compostable materials – like starch and cellulose-based bioplastics – where it cannot be re-used or recycled. this includes fast food wrappers, sandwich boxes and drink cartons. after they have been used, many of these materials would be suitable for anaerobic digestion (ad), allowing them to be made into renewable energy.[123]
buildings like the water polo arena will be relocated elsewhere. building parts like roofing covers and membranes of different temporary venues will be recycled via vinyloop. this allowed organisers to meet the standards of the olympic delivery authority concerning environmental protection. through this recycling process, the olympic games pvc policy is fulfilled. it says that
"the majority of temporary facilities created for the olympic games including the aquatic centre temporary stands, basketball arena, water polo arena, and the shooting facilities at the royal artillery barracks, are essentially big tents. basically pvc stretched over lightweight steel frame. this design solution makes them efficient to install, reduces the need for any significant foundations and are, of course, reusable. we were challenged by the public around the use of pvc; but we considered it to be the right material for certain functions. we therefore challenged the pvc supply chain to have certain environmental performance criteria in place, including a take back and recycle scheme" says kirsten henson, materials manager for the london 2012 olympic park.[124]
london 2012 inaugurated olympic games guidelines that included the recycling of pvc.[125]
the olympic charter, the set of rules and guidelines for the organization of the olympic games and for governing the olympic movement, states that
locog shall organise a programme of cultural events which must cover at least the entire period during which the olympic village is open.[126]the cultural olympiad comprises many programmes, with over 500 events spread over four years across the whole of the united kingdom, and culminating in the london 2012 festival.[127][128]
the opening ceremony officially began at 9:00 pm british summer time (utc+1) on 27 july in the olympic stadium and was called "isles of wonder".[129] oscar-winning director danny boyle was its artistic director, with music direction by rick smith of underworld.[130]
the games were officially opened by queen elizabeth ii, accompanied by prince philip, duke of edinburgh.[131] it was the second games the queen had opened personally, the first being in 1976 in montreal. the ceremony included a short comic film starring daniel craig as secret agent james bond and the queen as herself,[132] and another starring rowan atkinson as mr. bean.
live musical performers included frank turner, dame evelyn glennie, mike oldfield, the london symphony orchestra, dizzee rascal, arctic monkeys, and sir paul mccartney who performed "hey jude" as the closing act.[133][134] the ceremony transmitted live on bbc one attracted a peak viewing audience of over 27 million in the uk.[135]
the closing ceremony was held on 12 august. it featured a flashback fiesta to british music with the who closing the performance. the ceremony also included a handover of the olympic flag by boris johnson, mayor of london, to eduardo paes, mayor of rio de janeiro, the host city of the 2016 summer olympics.[136]
around 10,700 athletes from 205 national olympic committees (nocs) took part,[6] (79 countries acquired at least one medal: gold, silver or bronze)[137] surpassing the 1948 summer olympics in london and the 2002 commonwealth games in manchester as the largest multi-sport event ever to be held in the united kingdom.[138]
three athletes from the netherlands antilles olympic committee, which the ioc executive committee had ceased to recognise at the ioc session of july 2011, and one athlete from south sudan, which had no recognized noc, participated independently under the olympic flag.[139]

during the games some countries and continents had a national house. these temporary meeting places for supporters, athletes and other followers were located throughout london.[142]
the 2012 summer olympics featured 26 different sports encompassing 39 disciplines and 302 events. in the list below, the number of events in each discipline is noted in parentheses.




women's boxing was included in the programme for the first time, and 36 women competed in three weight classes. there was a special dispensation for the shooting events, which would otherwise have been illegal under uk gun law.[143][144] in tennis, mixed doubles returned to the olympic programme for the first time since 1924.[145]
london's bid featured the same 28 sports that had been included in other recent summer olympics, but the ioc voted to drop baseball and softball from the 2012 games just two days after london had been selected as the host city. there was an appeal, but the ioc voted to uphold the decision, and the two sports were scheduled to be discontinued after their last appearance at the 2008 olympics.[146] the ioc then voted on whether or not to replace them; karate, squash, golf, roller sports and rugby sevens were considered. karate and squash were the two final nominees, but neither received enough votes to reach the required two-thirds majority.[146]
although formal demonstration sports were eliminated after the 1992 summer olympics,[147] special tournaments for non-olympic sports can be run during the games, such as the wushu tournament at the 2008 summer olympics.[148] there were attempts to run twenty20 cricket[148] and netball[149] tournaments alongside the 2012 games, but neither campaign was successful.
the final official schedule was released on 15 february 2011.[150]

these olympic games resulted in 32 world records in eight sports. the largest number of records were set in swimming, at eight. china, great britain and the united states set the most records, at five each.
a total of 85 national olympic committees (nocs) won medals, 54 of those countries winning at least one gold medal. bahrain,[151] botswana,[152] cyprus,[153] gabon,[154] grenada (a gold medal),[155] guatemala,[156] and montenegro[157] won their first ever olympic medals. the united states finished at the top of the table winning 46 gold medals and winning 103 medals overall. china finished second with 38 gold medals and 88 medals overall. hosts great britain came in third place winning 29 gold medals and 65 medals overall in their best performance since london hosted its inaugural summer olympics in 1908 pushing russia into fourth place who won 19 gold medals although they won 68 medals (3 more than great britain) overall.
  *   host nation (great britain)  *   host nation (great britain)
  ‡   see subpage: changes in medal standings
the host broadcaster was olympic broadcasting services (obs), an agency of the ioc. the obs used its own cameras, and crews subcontracted from other olympic broadcasters, to cover the events. the base video and audio were sold to other broadcasters, who added their own commentary and presentation.
the official recording format of the 2012 summer olympics used panasonic's digital technologies. the official video was produced and distributed from the international broadcast centre in 1080/50i high-definition (hd) format. panasonic announced that dvcpro hd would be the official recording format. obs london used p2 hd shoulder-mount camcorders.[159]
the ioc's wanted television coverage to reach as broad a worldwide audience as possible, and london 2012 was covered by several national and regional broadcasters. in the uk, the bbc carried the olympics and channel 4 the paralympics. the bbc aimed to broadcast all 5,000 hours of the games.[160] bbc parliament's freeview channel was suspended, bbc three's on-air time was extended so that it could show olympic events in the daytime, and 24 additional bbc olympics channels were available via cable, satellite and the internet in the uk.
the us television rights, owned by nbc, accounted for over half the rights revenue for the ioc.[book 1] thousands of americans, however, accessed the bbc's omnibus coverage using proxy servers or vpns.[161] despite high viewership, many viewers were disappointed with nbc's coverage.[162][163] the operations of broadcasters granted rights to the games were hosted in the dedicated international broadcast centre inside the security cordon of the olympic park. youtube planned to stream the games in 64 territories in asia and sub-saharan africa where there were no official broadcasters.[164]
in sri lanka a dispute occurred between sri lanka rupavahini corporation (slrc) and mbc networks (mtv/mbc) as to who was the official broadcaster of the games. this problem was caused as asia-pacific broadcasting union (abu) had offered the official broadcasting rights to both networks, as both of the networks were abu members. so slrc filed a case against mbc networks for broadcasting rights at the colombo magistrate's court. considering the case, the court issued a special court order preventing mbc networks' olympic broadcast and stated that slrc should be the sole broadcaster.[165] however, when the games started, both networks broadcast most of the events simultaneously. another dispute had previously occurred between carlton sports network (csn) and slrc, but the sports minister, mahindananda aluthgamage, had stated that slrc had the exclusive rights.[166]
following the conclusion of the games the international olympic committee in november 2012 announced the winners of the golden rings for the best broadcast coverage of the games. the best olympic sports production was awarded to sailing, produced by christopher lincoln / gary milkis, ursula romero. the production for the canoe kayak slalom and rowing/canoe sprint came second and third. the best on air promotion went to nbc with foxtel and zdf finishing second and third. the best olympic feature saw nbc olympics win again as sky italia and zdf completed the podium places. the best athlete's profile went to tv record nbc claimed second with their profile of david rudisha while a profile of miguel correa and ruben rezola saw espn latin america take third. the best olympic program went nbc, while host broadcasters bbc took the silver trophy for super saturday (the middle saturday of the games) and bronze was claimed by nine network for their live coverage of day 16 of the games.[167]
"survival" by muse was announced as the official song of the olympics,[168] to be played by international broadcasters reporting on the games.[169] in august 2009, the royal mail commissioned artists and illustrators to design 30 stamps, which were released in batches of 10 between 2009 and 2011.[170] the last ones were released on 22 july 2011.[171] two £5 coins designed by saiman miah have been made to commemorate the olympics.[172] as with other olympics since 1952, the royal mint will strike a set of commemorative one-kilogram gold and silver coins.[173]
the official motto for the 2012 summer olympics is "inspire a generation". it was chosen to highlight the organiser's commitment to inspire the world including younger generations to get involved in sporting events through its games' legacy.[174]
there have been two london 2012 logos: one created by kino design for the bidding process and a second as the brand for the games themselves. the former was a ribbon with blue, yellow, black, green and red stripes winding through the text "london 2012", making the shape of the river thames in east london. the latter, designed by wolff olins, was published on 4 june 2007. it is a representation of the number 2012, with the olympic rings embedded within the zero.[175]
public reaction to the main logo in a june 2007 bbc poll was largely negative; more than 80% of votes gave it the lowest possible rating.[176] several newspapers ran their own logo competitions, displaying alternative submissions from their readers,[177] and several writers from news agencies criticised the logo.[177][178] a segment of animated footage released at the same time as the logo was reported to trigger seizures in a small number of people with photosensitive epilepsy, and a short segment was removed from the london 2012 website in response.[179] it was suggested that the logo resembled the cartoon character lisa simpson performing fellatio on her brother bart simpson.[180][181][182][183][184][185][186]
in february 2011, iran threatened to boycott the olympics, complaining that the logo appeared to spell out the word "zion". however, this boycott did not occur.[187]
the official london 2012 olympic typeface was called headline 2012 and also suffered some criticism. journalist simon garfield made it number 1 in the list of the "8 worst fonts in the world" in his 2010 book just my type, commenting that "the uncool font is based on jaggedness and crudeness", although he conceded that it was "a brilliant piece of corporate branding".[188][189] the magazine wired pointed out that the typeface was intended for "awareness, impact and memorability as a headline typeface" rather than elegance or readability in long sections of text.[190]
the official mascots for the 2012 summer olympics and paralympic games were unveiled on 19 may 2010.[191] wenlock and mandeville are animations depicting two drops of steel from a steelworks in bolton.[191] they are named after much wenlock, a town in shropshire that holds a forerunner of the current olympic games, and stoke mandeville, a village in buckinghamshire where a forerunner of the paralympic games was first held.[191] the writer michael morpurgo wrote the story concept for the mascots, and an animation was produced.[192] two stories have been created about the mascots: out of a rainbow and adventures on a rainbow.[193]
creative review magazine liked the mascots,[194] but elsewhere their design was greeted with some disdain. one columnist jested that they were the product of a "drunken one-night stand between a teletubby and a dalek".[195] others have compared them to izzy, the much disparaged mascot of the 1996 atlanta summer olympics.[196] still others have likened them to kang and kodos from the simpsons.[197] however, the mascots' creators claim that young people find the duo appealing.[198]
the 1981 best picture oscar–winning film chariots of fire, which tells the story of two british athletes in the 1924 olympics, was a recurring theme in promotions for the 2012 olympics.[199] a digitally re-mastered version of chariots of fire was released on 13 july 2012 and screened in over 100 uk cinemas as part of the celebrations,[200] and a 2012 stage adaptation ran in london theatres from 9 may 2012 to 5 january 2013.[201] the film's theme tune was performed during the opening ceremony by the london symphony orchestra, conducted by simon rattle. the performance was accompanied by a comedic skit by rowan atkinson, which included the opening beach-running footage from the film.[202] a new orchestration of the film's theme tune was played during each medal presentation of the games.[203]
locog and the ioc agreed sponsorship deals with several companies, each assigned to one of four categories; worldwide, tier one, tier two and tier three.[204] the worldwide partners are: acer, atos, coca-cola, dow, general electric, mcdonald's, omega sa, panasonic, procter & gamble, samsung and visa.[204] the companies provided £1.4 billion of funding altogether, allocated evenly between the ioc and locog.[205]
during the lead-up to the games, there were controversies over sponsorship,[206] the athletes' use of social media, and several political issues. after a complicated lottery process, thousands of people failed to secure seats for the events they wanted, but a large number of empty seats were observed throughout the games, even at some of the most popular events. there was speculation that this was due to a failure of corporate sponsors to make use of tickets they had received.[88]
during the games, eight competitors in the badminton women's doubles were disqualified for "not using best efforts", when they tried to lose matches in the group stage to obtain more favourable fixtures in the knockout rounds.[207][208] a number of results in boxing, gymnastics and judo were overturned by officials after initial decisions were appealed against.[209][210][211]
ye shiwen faced doping allegations after her gold medal in the women's 400m individual medley as she came from being behind the world record in the final 50m to beating it by 1.02 seconds. furthermore, her last 50m was swum 0.17 seconds quicker than the men's winner of the corresponding race. all charges were later dropped.[212]
just before the start of the men's 100m final, a spectator threw a plastic bottle into tyson gay's lane, intended to hit usain bolt who was three lanes outside in lane 7. the race was unaffected, and bolt would go on to become the second man in history to defend a 100m olympic title. the spectator, later identified as ashley gill-webb, was soon arrested after he was struck on the head by dutch judoka and bronze medalist edith bosch, whom he happened to be sitting next to.[213][214] locog chairman sebastian coe later stated: "i'm not suggesting vigilantism but it was actually poetic justice that they happened to be sitting next to a judo player".[214] gill-webb later pleaded not guilty to a charge of using threatening words or behaviour with intent to cause harassment, alarm or distress at stratford magistrates' court.[215] he was later found guilty.[216]
it was announced before the summer games that half of all the competitors would be tested for drugs, with 150 scientists set to take 6,000 samples between the start of the games and the end of the paralympic games.[217] every competitor who won a medal was also tested. the olympic laboratory tested up to 400 samples every day for more than 240 prohibited substances.[217] as of late 2017, 31 medals have been stripped due to doping violations, 15 of which were originally awarded to russian athletes.
the two previous times the games were held in london:

the 2016 summer olympics (portuguese: jogos olímpicos de verão de 2016),[a] officially known as the games of the xxxi olympiad (portuguese: jogos da xxxi olimpíada) and commonly known as rio 2016, was an international multi-sport event that was held from 5 to 21 august 2016 in rio de janeiro, brazil, with preliminary events in some sports beginning on 3 august. these were the first olympic games ever to be held in south america and the fourth to be held in a developing country, after the 1968 summer olympics in mexico, the 1980 summer olympics in the soviet union, and the 2008 summer olympics in china.
more than 11,000 athletes from 205 national olympic committees took part, including first time entrants kosovo, south sudan, and the refugee olympic team.[2][3] with 306 sets of medals, the games featured 28 olympic sports, including rugby sevens and golf, which were added to the olympic program in 2009. these sporting events took place at 33 venues in the host city and at five separate venues in the brazilian cities of são paulo, belo horizonte, salvador, brasília, and manaus.
these were the first summer olympic games to take place under the international olympic committee (ioc) presidency of thomas bach.[3] the host city rio de janeiro was announced at the 121st ioc session in copenhagen, denmark, on 2 october 2009. rio became the first south american city ever to host the olympic games. these were the first games to be held in a portuguese-speaking country, the first summer edition to be held entirely in the host country's winter season, the first since 1968 to be held in latin america, and the first since 2000 to be held in the southern hemisphere.[4]
the united states topped the medal table, winning the most gold and overall medals, 46 and 121, as well as its 1,000th summer olympic gold medal overall. great britain finished second and became only the second country in modern olympic history to increase its tally of medals in the olympiad immediately after it had been host nation. china finished third. host country brazil won seven gold medals, its largest tally at any single summer olympics, finishing in thirteenth place. bahrain, fiji, jordan, kosovo, puerto rico, singapore, tajikistan, ivory coast, and vietnam each won their first gold medals, as did the group of independent olympic athletes (from kuwait).
the process for the 2016 summer olympics was officially launched on 16 may 2007.[5] the first step for each city was to submit an initial application to the international olympic committee by 13 september 2007, confirming their intention to bid. completed official bid files, containing answers to a 25-question ioc form, were to be submitted by each 14 january 2008. four candidate cities were chosen for the shortlist on 4 june 2008: chicago, madrid, rio de janeiro and tokyo, which hosted the 1964 summer olympics and will host again in 2020. the ioc did not promote doha to the candidature phase, despite scoring higher than selected candidate city rio de janeiro, because of their intent of hosting the olympics in october, outside of the ioc's sporting calendar. prague and baku also failed to make the cut.[6]
nawal el moutawakel of morocco headed the 10-member evaluation commission, having also chaired the evaluation commission for the 2012 summer olympics bids. the commission made on-site inspections in the second quarter of 2009. they issued a comprehensive technical appraisal for ioc members on 2 september, one month before elections.[7]
many restrictions are in place designed to prevent bidding cities from communicating with or influencing directly the 115 voting members. cities may not invite any ioc member to visit nor may they send anything that could be construed as a gift. nonetheless, bidding cities invest large sums in their pr and media programs in an attempt to indirectly influence the ioc members by garnering domestic support, support from sports media and general international media.
the final voting was held on 2 october 2009, in copenhagen with madrid and rio de janeiro perceived as favourites to land the games. chicago and tokyo were eliminated after the first and second rounds of voting, respectively, while rio de janeiro took a significant lead over madrid heading into the final round. the lead held and rio de janeiro was announced as host of 2016 summer olympics.
on 26 june 2011, it was reported on aroundtherings.com that roderlei generali, the coo of the rio de janeiro organizing committee for the olympic games, resigned just one year after taking the job at rooc. this comes just five months after cco flávio pestana quit for personal reasons.[10] pestana withdrew later during the 2012 summer paralympics. renato ciuchin was then appointed as coo.[11]
events took place at eighteen existing venues, nine new venues constructed specifically for the games, and seven temporary venues.[12]
each event was held in one of four geographically segregated olympic clusters: barra, copacabana, deodoro, and maracanã. the same was done for the 2007 pan american games.[13][14] several of the venues were located at the barra cluster olympic park.[12] athletes could access their venues in shorter than ten minutes and about 75 percent could do so in less than 25 minutes. of the 34 competition locations, eight of them underwent permanent works, seven were limited, and nine were perpetual legacy venues.[15]
the largest venue at the games in terms of seating capacity was the 74,738-seat maracanã stadium, which served as the ceremonies venue and site of the football finals.[12] the second largest stadium was the 60,000-seat estádio olímpico joão havelange, which hosted track and field events.[12]
the athletes' village was said to be the largest in olympic history. fittings included about 80,000 chairs, 70,000 tables, 29,000 mattresses, 60,000 clothes hangers, 6,000 television sets and 10,000 smartphones.[16]
the barra olympic park is a cluster of nine sporting venues in barra da tijuca, in the west zone of rio de janeiro, brazil. the site of the olympic park was formerly occupied by the autódromo internacional nelson piquet, also known as jacarepaguá.[17]
the nine venues within the olympic park were:[18][19]
as well as the estádio olímpico joão havelange and maracanã and in rio de janeiro, football matches took place at five venues in the cities of são paulo, belo horizonte, salvador, brasília and manaus.
maracanã stadiumrio de janeiro, rj
olympic stadium  rio de janeiro, rj
arena da amazôniamanaus, am
arena corinthianssão paulo, sp
arena fonte novasalvador, ba
estádio nacionalbrasília, df
mineirãobelo horizonte, mg
rio's historical downtown underwent an urban waterfront revitalization project called porto maravilha. it covers 5 km2 (1.9 sq mi) in area. the project aimed to redevelop the port area, increasing the city center's attractiveness and enhancing rio's competitive position in the global economy.[20]
the urban renovation involves: 700 km (430 mi) of public networks for water supply, sanitation, drainage, electricity, gas and telecom; 4 km (2.5 mi) of tunnels; 70 km (43 mi) of roads; 650 km2 (250 sq mi) of sidewalks; 17 km (11 mi) of bike path; 15,000 trees; three sanitation treatment plants. as part of this renovation, a new tram was built from the santos dumont airport to rodoviária novo rio. it was due to open in april 2016.[21]
the games required more than 200 kilometers of security fencing. a 15,000 square meter warehouse in barra da tijuca in western rio was used to assemble and supply the furniture and fittings for the olympic village. a second warehouse of 90,000 square meters, located in duque de caxias near the roads that provide access to the venues, contained all the equipment needed for the sporting events.[16]
the medal design was unveiled on 15 june 2016; they were produced by the casa da moeda do brasil. the bronze and silver medals contained 30% recycled materials, while the gold medals were produced using gold that had been mined and extracted using means that met a series of sustainability criteria, such as being extracted without the use of mercury. the medals feature a wreath design, while the obverse, as is traditional, features nike, the greek goddess of victory. they were accompanied by a wooden carrying box, while medalists also received a trophy of the games' emblem.[22][23]
in may 2017, an associated press article disclosed that more than 100 athletes from around the world reported that their medals had damage, including black spots, flaking, or surface degrading. rio officials offered to replace any defective medals and found problems with 6 to 7 percent of all awarded medals.[24]
the olympic flame was lit at the temple of hera in olympia on 21 april 2016, the traditional start of the greek phase of the torch relay. on 27 april the flame was handed over to the brazilian organisers at a ceremony at the panathenaic stadium in athens. a brief stop was made in switzerland to visit the ioc headquarters and the olympic museum in lausanne as well as the united nations office at geneva.[25]
the torch relay began its brazilian journey on 3 may at the capital brasília. the torch relay visited more than 300 brazilian cities (including all the 26 states capitals and the brazilian federal district), with the last part held in the city of rio de janeiro,[26] lighting the cauldron during the 2016 summer olympics opening ceremony on 5 august.
unpaid volunteers performed a variety of tasks before and during the games. a target of 50,000 volunteers was set as early as 2012. when recruitment took place in 2014, over 240,000 applications were received. the volunteers wore clothing which included yellow polo shirts and jackets, beige trousers, white socks and green trainers which they collected from the uniform distribution and accreditation centre. but many volunteers have stopped to due long working hours and one free meal a day.[27] volunteers also wore photo accreditation badges which were also worn by officials, athletes, family members and media which gain them access to specific venues and buildings around the site.[28]
the ticket prices were announced on 16 september 2014, all of which were sold in brazilian reais (brl). a total of 7.5 million tickets were to be sold in total, with ticket prices ranging from brl 40 for many events to brl 4,600 for the most expensive seats at the opening ceremony. about 3.8 million of these tickets were available for brl 70 or less.[29][30]
as an aspect of its bid, rio's organizing committee planned to focus on sustainability and environmental protection as a theme of these games, going on to dub them a "green games for a blue planet".[31] as legacy projects, organisers intended to introduce a wider array of public transport options, upgrade the infrastructure of the favelas to provide improved transport and access to utilities, upgrade rio's sewer system in order to remediate the level of pollution in the guanabara bay.[31][32] and plant 24 million seedlings to offset the expected carbon emissions of the games. however, some of these projects were met with delays or faced with economic shortfalls, which led some critics to believe that rio would not be able to accomplish them.[31][33]
the focus on environmental protection also influenced the implementation of certain olympic protocols: the olympic cauldron was designed to be smaller than previous iterations in order to reduce emissions, and used a kinetic sculpture to enhance its appearance in lieu of a larger body of flames.[34] the bronze and silver medals, as well as ribbons on all medals, incorporate recycled materials.[22][23]
the athletes were not presented with flowers during medal ceremonies, as had been traditionally done at prior olympics (although flowers were still used as part of the staging of medal presentations). organisers considered the practice to be wasteful since they were often thrown away, and "would struggle to survive in the tropical brazilian climate" if kept. the podiums were also designed so that their materials could be recycled to make furniture.[23][35]
the future arena, host of handball competitions, was designed as a modular temporary venue whose components can be reconstructed to build schools.[36] however, as of november 2017, the arena is still standing because of lack of money to dismantle it and no allocation of funds to do so in the 2018 budget.[37]
portions of the opening ceremony were also dedicated to the issue of climate change.[38]
the opening ceremony took place at maracana stadium on 5 august 2016, and was directed by fernando meirelles, daniela thomas and andrucha waddington.[39] the ceremony highlighted aspects of brazilian history and culture, and featured a segment narrated by fernanda montenegro and judi dench with an appeal to environmental conservation and preventing global warming.[38][40]
the ceremony also featured the inaugural presentation of the olympic laurel, an honor bestowed by the ioc to those that have made "significant achievements in education, culture, development and peace through sport", to kipchoge "kip" keino.[41] the games were officially opened by acting president of brazil michel temer.[42]
the olympic cauldron was lit by vanderlei cordeiro de lima, the men's marathon bronze medalist at the 2004 summer olympics who was also awarded the pierre de coubertin medal for sportsmanship by the ioc after being attacked by a spectator and losing his lead. the cauldron was originally expected to be lit by brazilian footballer pelé, but he declined to participate due to health problems.[40][43][44]
following the opening ceremony, a public cauldron was lit in front of the candelária church by jorge gomes, a 14-year-old brazilian athlete who had escaped from poverty to train as a runner.[45][46]
the 2016 summer olympic programme featured 28 sports encompassing 306 events. the number of events in each discipline is noted in parentheses.




in april 2008, the ioc began accepting applications for two new sports to be introduced to the olympic programme, which included baseball and softball (which were dropped in 2005), karate, squash, golf, roller sports, and rugby union all applied to be included. formal presentations were held for the ioc executive board in june 2009.[47]
in august, the executive board initially gave its approval to rugby sevens—a seven-player version of rugby union—by a majority vote, thus removing baseball, roller sports, and squash from contention; leaving golf, karate, and rugby sevens. a final vote was held on 9 october 2009, the final day of the 121st ioc session. a new system was in place at this session; a sport now needed only a simple majority from the full ioc committee for approval rather than the two-thirds majority previously required.[48][49]
the international sailing federation announced in may 2012 that windsurfing would be replaced at the 2016 olympics by kitesurfing,[50] but this decision was reversed in november.[51]
the 121st ioc session decided to add rugby sevens and golf to the rio 2016 program.[52] the tally for rugby was 81 in favor, with 8 against,[53] and golf was approved 63–26.[54] neither sport is new to the olympics—rugby was last featured at the olympics in 1924, and golf in 1904.
all 206 national olympic committees have qualified at least one athlete.[citation needed] the first three nations to qualify athletes for the games were germany, great britain, and the netherlands who each qualified four athletes for the team dressage by winning medals in the team event at the 2014 fei world equestrian games.[55]
as host nation, brazil has received automatic entry for some sports including in all cycling disciplines and six places for weightlifting events.[56][57]
the 2016 summer olympics were the first games in which kosovo and south sudan were eligible to participate. bulgarian and russian weightlifters were banned from rio olympics for numerous anti-doping violations.[58][59]
kuwait was banned in october 2015 for the second time in five years over government interference in the country's olympic committee.[60]
due to the european migrant crisis and other reasons, the ioc allowed athletes to compete as independent olympians under the olympic flag. in the previous summer olympic games, refugees were ineligible to compete because of their inability to represent their home nocs.[61] on 2 march 2016, the ioc finalized plans for a specific refugee olympic team (rot); out of 43 refugee athletes deemed potentially eligible, 10 were chosen to form the team.[62]
due to the suspension of the national olympic committee of kuwait, participants from kuwait were allowed to participate under the olympic flag as independent olympic athletes.
in november 2015, russia was provisionally suspended from all international track and field athletic competitions by the international association of athletics federations (iaaf) following a world anti-doping agency (wada) report into a doping program in the country.[63] the iaaf announced that it would allow individual russian athletes to apply for "exceptional eligibility" to participate in the games as "neutral" athletes, if it were independently verified that they had not engaged in doping nor in the russian doping program.[64]
on 24 july 2016, the ioc rejected the iaaf and wada's recommendations to allow athletes to compete neutrally, stating that the olympic charter "does not foresee such 'neutral athletes'" and that it was up to each country's national olympic committee to decide which athletes would be competing.[65] as a result, russian athletes competed under the russian flag, although they would compete under a neutral flag in the 2018 winter olympics following several developments with regard to the doping investigation.
during the games some countries and continents had a national house. these temporary meeting places for supporters, athletes and other followers were located throughout rio de janeiro.[66]
source[66]
this is currently based on the schedule released on the same day as ticket sales began, 31 march 2015.[67]
twenty-seven world records and ninety-one olympic records were set during the 2016 summer olympics. the records were set in archery, athletics, canoeing, cycling track, modern pentathlon, rowing, shooting, swimming and weightlifting.
the top ten listed nocs by number of gold medals are listed below. host nation brazil finished in 13th place with a total of 19 medals (7 gold, 6 silver, and 6 bronze).
  *   host nation (brazil)a number of events, most notably in aquatics, beach volleyball, and track and field, were scheduled with sessions and matches occurring as late as 10:00 p.m. to midnight brt. these scheduling practices were influenced primarily by united states broadcast rightsholder nbc – nbc's substantial rights fees are  one of the major sources of revenue for the ioc, therefore it has allowed the network to have influence on event scheduling to maximize u.s. television ratings when possible (nbc agreed to a us$7.75 billion contract extension on may 7, 2014, to air the olympics through 2032, including us$1.23 billion for rio 2016)[68][69] as well as the main brazilian rightsholder rede globo. as brasília time is only one hour ahead of the u.s. eastern time zone, certain marquee events were scheduled to occur during u.s. primetime hours (traditionally 8:00 to 11:00 p.m. et, 9:00 p.m. to midnight brt) allowing them to be broadcast live on the east coast as opposed to being delayed. this practice was also to the benefit of globo: a brazilian critic noted that the network very rarely pre-empts its primetime telenovelas, as they are among the highest-rated programs in the country.[70][71][72][73]
the closing ceremony of the 2016 summer olympics was held on 21 august 2016 from 20:00 to 22:50 brt at the maracanã stadium.[74] as per traditional olympic protocol, the ceremony featured cultural presentations from both the current (brazil) and following (japan) host countries, as well as closing remarks by ioc president thomas bach and the leader of the games' organizing committee carlos arthur nuzman, the official handover of the olympic flag from rio de janeiro mayor eduardo paes to tokyo governor yuriko koike, whose city will host the 2020 summer olympics, and the extinguishing of the olympic flame.[75]
the creative director for the ceremony was rosa magalhães.[76] amid heavy rainfall, the ceremony began with interpretive dancers representing various landmarks in the host city. martinho da vila then performed a rendition of the classic song "carinhoso [pt]" by pixinguinha. in another segment, introducing the athletes, pop singer roberta sá channeled carmen miranda, the fruit-headdress-wearing, midcentury hollywood diva who endures as a beloved camp figure. the parade of flags followed shortly after a choir of 27 children, representing the states of brazil, sang the brazilian national anthem.
the oxford olympics study 2016 estimated the out-turn cost of the rio 2016 summer olympics at us$4.6 billion in 2015-dollars. this figure included sports-related costs, that is, (i) operational costs incurred by the organizing committee for the purpose of staging the games, of which the largest components were technology, transportation, workforce, and administration costs, while other operational costs included security, catering, ceremonies, and medical services, and (ii) direct capital costs incurred by the host city and country or private investors to build the competition venues, the olympic village, international broadcast center, and media and press center, which were required to host the games.[77]
indirect capital costs were not included, such as for road, rail, or airport infrastructure, or for hotel upgrades or other business investment incurred in preparation for the games but not directly related to staging the games. the rio olympics' cost of us$4.6 billion compares with costs of us$40–44 billion for beijing 2008 and us$51 billion for sochi 2014, the two most expensive olympics in history. the average cost of the summer games since 1960 is us$5.2 billion.[77]
olympic broadcasting services served as the host broadcaster for these games; produced from a total of seven mobile units, obs distributed 40,000 hours of television footage and 60,000 hours of digital footage of the games to its international rightsholders; for the first time in olympic history, digital-oriented footage exceeded the amount of television-oriented footage. the international broadcast centre was constructed in the barra da tijuca cluster.[78] nhk and obs once again filmed portions of the games, including the opening ceremony and selected events, in 8k resolution video. additionally, expanding upon a 180-degree trial at the 2016 winter youth olympics, 85 hours of video content were originated in 360-degree virtual reality formats.[79] in the united states, nbc offered 4k content, downconverted from the 8k footage and with hdr and dolby atmos support, to participating television providers.[80] owing to their expertise in domestic broadcasts of the new sports introduced in rio, nbc and sky new zealand staff handled the production of the golf and rugby sevens events on behalf of obs.[78]
in august 2009, the ioc reached a deal to sell domestic broadcast rights to the 2016 summer olympics to grupo globo. replacing record tv the deal covers free-to-air coverage on rede globo, pay tv, and digital rights to the games. in turn, globo sub-licensed partial free-to-air rights to rede record, along with rede bandeirantes. ioc board member richard carrión described the agreement as "unprecedented", touting that "by working with brazil's leading media organizations, we are confident that this represents a great deal for olympic fans in the region. there will be a huge increase in the amount of olympic action broadcast, both during and outside games time, and brazilians will have more choice of how, when and where they follow their olympic games."[81]
following the conclusion of the games the international olympic committee in november 2017 announced the winners of the golden rings in six categories for the best broadcast coverage of the games. the best olympic sports production was awarded to beach volleyball. it was produced by geoff johnson. and directed by greg breakell and gary milkis. the production for the cycling road race and sailing came second and third. the next category was best olympic feature. tv globo's feature entitle "esporte  espetacular" finished third and china central television's feature - a sequel of love came second. the winner was nbc olympics for their feature titled the most beautiful thing. the third category was the best athlete profile. rtbf radio télévision de la communauté française de belgique for their profile of nafi thiam collected the third place prize. tv globo went one better than the previous category coming second with their profile of izaquias queiroz. the winner of the category again was nbc this time for their piece on wayde van niekerk. the best on-air promotion was announced next with the bbc sport winning with nbc this time coming second and bulgarian national television finished third. the best olympic digital service went to nbc with zdf-german tv and sportv/globosat picking up the second and third places. the best olympic programme was awarded to sportv/globosat while tv globo and bbc sport completed the podium.[82]
the official mascots of the 2016 summer olympics and paralympics were unveiled on 24 november 2014. they were created by sao paulo-based animation company birdo.[83] the olympic mascot vinicius, named after musician vinicius de moraes, represents brazilian wildlife and carries design traits of cats, monkeys, and birds.[83] according to their fictional backgrounds, the mascots "were both born from the joy of brazilians after it was announced that rio would host the games."[84]
brand director beth lula stated that the mascots were intended to reflect the diversity of brazil's culture and people.[85] the names of the mascots were determined by a public vote whose results were announced on 14 december 2014; the names, which reference the co-writers of the song "the girl from ipanema", won over two other sets of names, tallying 44 percent of 323,327 votes.[86] at the olympic wrestling events, coaches were given plush dolls of vinicius to throw into the ring when they wished to challenge a referee's call.[87]
the official emblem for the 2016 summer olympics was designed by the brazilian agency tatíl design and unveiled on 31 december 2010, winning in a competition against 139 agencies.[88] the logo represents three figures joined at their arms and feet, with the overall shape reflecting that of sugarloaf mountain. the emblem was also designed to have a three-dimensional form, which designer fred gelli claimed made it the "first 3d logo in the history of the olympics."[89]
the logo has been noted as evoking henri matisse's painting dance. there were also allegations by the colorado-based telluride foundation that the logo had been plagiarized from its own. while also consisting of several figures linked in motion, the telluride foundation logo contains four figures. this is not the first time that the foundation had alleged plagiarism of its logo by a brazilian event; in 2004, the linked figures element had been copied for the logo of carnival celebrations in salvador. gelli defended the allegations, stating that the concept of figures linked in embrace was not inherently original as it was "an ancient reference" and "in the collective unconscious". gelli cited dance as an influence of the logo's concept, and stated that the designers had intentionally aimed to make the interpretation of the concept as dissimilar to others as possible.[90]
the lead-up to these games was marked by controversies, including the brazil's political and economic crisis; the zika virus epidemic and the significant pollution in the guanabara bay; and a doping scandal involving russia, which affected the participation of its athletes in the games. however, nobody competing in or attending the olympics contracted the zika virus[91] and the games took place normally, without any major incident.[92][93][94]
in 2014, operation car wash, an investigation by the federal police of brazil, uncovered unprecedented money laundering and corruption at the state-controlled oil company petrobras. in early 2015, a series of protests against alleged corruption by the government of president dilma rousseff began in brazil, triggered by revelations that numerous politicians were involved in the petrobras affair. by early 2016, the scandal had escalated into a full-blown political crisis affecting not only president rousseff, but also former president luiz inácio lula da silva, resulting in massive demonstrations all over the country involving millions of protesters,[95] both anti and pro-rousseff.[96][97] at the same time, brazil faced its worst economic recession since the 1990s, raising questions about whether the country was adequately prepared for the games against a volatile political and economic backdrop. on 12 may, president rousseff was stripped of her powers and duties for 180 days, after an impeachment vote in the federal senate, thus vice president michel temer acted as acting president during the games.[98]
on 5 october 2017, the head of the brazilian olympic committee carlos nuzman, was arrested amid an money laundering investigation that a $2 million payment was made to secure votes for the bid to bring the olympics to rio. the money was allegedly paid to lamine diack and his son papa massata who was a member of the ioc at the time of the alleged payment which was three days before the vote in 2009. all three were charged with money laundering along with the former governor of rio state sergio cabral, who was already in prison for money laundering offences at the time, brazilian businessman arthur soares and ex brazilian olympic committee chief leonardo gryner. all six were charged with running a criminal organization, money laundering and violating currency laws in their own native countries.[99] on 4 july 2019 it was reported that cabral told a judge the money went to diack, the former president of the international association of athletics federations (iaaf) and was used to buy as many as nine votes.[100]
an outbreak of the mosquito-borne zika virus in brazil raised fears regarding its potential impact on athletes and visitors. to prevent puddles of stagnant water that allow mosquitoes to breed, organisers announced plans to perform daily inspections of olympic venues.[101] zika virus transmission was also attributed to inefficient sewage treatment in the area—an issue that was also in the process of being addressed for the games.[102]
in may 2016, a group of 150 physicians and scientists sent an open letter to the world health organization, calling upon them to, according to co-author arthur caplan, have "an open, transparent discussion of the risks of holding the olympics as planned in brazil". the who dismissed the request, stating that "cancelling or changing the location of the 2016 olympics will not significantly alter the international spread of zika virus", and that there was "no public health justification" for postponing them.[103][104][105]
some athletes did not attend the games because of the epidemic.[106][107] on 2 september 2016, however, the world health organization reported that there were no confirmed cases of zika among athletes or visitors during the olympics.[108]
the guanabara bay, whose waters were used for sailing and windsurfing competitions, is heavily polluted. among the chief causes of the pollution are uncollected trash fed into the bay via polluted rivers and slums along the coast. pollution of the guanabara has been a long-term issue. officials promised at the earth summit in 1992 that they would begin to address the pollution but previous attempts to do so have been insufficient. as an aspect of their bid for the games, rio once again committed to making efforts towards cleaning the bay.[109][110] however, some of these proposed initiatives have faced budgetary issues.[32] prior to these efforts, only 17% of rio's sewage was treated;[111] this raw sewage also leaked into the bay. although mayor of rio eduardo paes stated that the city may not be able to reach its goal of having 80% of sewage treated,[112] at least 60% of sewage was treated by march 2016, with a projected goal of 65% of sewage being treated by the time the olympics started.[113]
rio's crime problems also received renewed attention after it was awarded the games; mayor paes stated that the city was facing "big issues" in heightening security, but that such concerns and issues were presented to the ioc throughout the bidding process.[114]
the governor of the state of rio de janeiro also highlighted the fact that london faced security problems, with a terrorist attack occurring just one day after it was awarded the 2012 summer olympics. the estimate was that 5,000 men of the national public security force and 22,000 military officers (14,800 army; 5,900 navy and 1,300 of the brazilian air force), in addition to the fixed quota of rio january, would act during the olympic games.[115]
on 21 july 2016, two weeks before the scheduled start of the games, the brazilian federal police broke up an islamic jihadist terrorist ring by arresting 12 people.[116]
media attention began growing in december 2014 when german broadcaster ard reported on state-sponsored doping in russia, comparing it to doping in east germany. in november 2015, the world anti-doping agency (wada) published a report and the international association of athletics federations (iaaf) suspended russia indefinitely from world track and field events. the united kingdom anti-doping agency later assisted wada with testing in russia. in june 2016, they reported that they were unable to fully carry out their work and noted intimidation by armed federal security service (fsb) agents.[117] after a russian former lab director made allegations about the 2014 winter olympics in sochi, wada commissioned an independent investigation led by richard mclaren. mclaren's investigation found corroborating evidence, concluding in a report published in july 2016 that the ministry of sport and the fsb had operated a "state-directed failsafe system" using a "disappearing positive [test] methodology" (dpm) from "at least late 2011 to august 2015".[118]
in response to these findings, wada announced that rusada should be regarded as non-compliant with respect to the world anti-doping code and recommended that russia be banned from competing at the 2016 summer olympics.[119] the ioc rejected the recommendation, stating that the ioc and each sport's international federation would make decisions on each athlete's individual basis.[120][121] one day prior to the opening ceremony, 278 athletes were cleared to compete under the russian flag, while 111 were removed because of doping.[122] in contrast, the entire kuwaiti team was banned from competing under their own flag (for a non-doping related matter).[123][124] unlike the ioc, the international paralympic committee voted unanimously to ban the entire russian team from the 2016 summer paralympics and suspended the russian paralympic committee, having found evidence that the dpm was also in operation at the 2014 winter paralympics.[125]
notes
citations

the 2020 summer olympics (2020年夏季オリンピック, nisen nijū-nen kaki orinpikku),[1] officially known as the games of the xxxii olympiad (japanese: 第三十二回オリンピック競技大会, hepburn: dai sanjūni-kai orinpikku kyōgi taikai)[2] and commonly known as tokyo 2020 or the recovery olympics,[3] is an upcoming international multi-sport event that is scheduled to take place from 24 july to 9 august 2020 in tokyo, japan, with preliminary events in some sports beginning on 22 july.
tokyo was selected as the host city during the 125th ioc session in buenos aires, argentina on 7 september 2013.[4] this will be the second time that tokyo has hosted the summer olympic games, the first being in 1964. it is also the first city in asia to host the summer olympic games twice, and overall the fourth olympics to be held in japan, which also hosted the winter olympics in 1972 (sapporo) and 1998 (nagano). the 2020 games will be the second of three consecutive olympics to be held in east asia, the first being the 2018 winter olympics in pyeongchang county, south korea, and the next being the 2022 winter olympics in beijing, china.
these games will see the introduction of new and additional competitions at the summer olympics, including 3x3 basketball, freestyle bmx and madison cycling, as well as further mixed events. under new ioc policies that allow the host organizing committee to add sports to the olympic programme to augment the permanent core olympic events, these games will see karate, sport climbing, surfing and skateboarding make their olympic debuts. there will also be the return of baseball and softball, both removed from the summer programme after 2008.
tokyo, istanbul, and madrid were the three candidate cities. the applicant cities of baku (azerbaijan) and doha (qatar) were not promoted to candidate status. a bid from rome was withdrawn.
the ioc voted to select the host city of the 2020 summer olympics on 7 september 2013 at the 125th ioc session at the buenos aires hilton in buenos aires, argentina. an exhaustive ballot system was used. no city won over 50% of the votes in the first round, and madrid and istanbul were tied for second place. a run-off vote between these two cities was held to determine which would be eliminated. in the final vote, a head-to-head contest between tokyo and istanbul, tokyo was selected by 60 votes to 36, as it got at least 49 votes needed for a majority.
the tokyo metropolitan government set aside a fund of 400 billion japanese yen (over 3.67 billion usd) to cover the cost of hosting the games. the japanese government is considering increasing slot capacity at both haneda airport and narita international airport by easing airspace restrictions. a new railway line is planned to link both airports through an expansion of tokyo station, cutting travel time from tokyo station to haneda from 30 minutes to 18 minutes, and from tokyo station to narita from 55 minutes to 36 minutes; the line would cost 400 billion yen and would be funded primarily by private investors, but east japan railway company (east jr) is planning a new route near tamachi to haneda airport.[6]  funding is also planned to accelerate completion of the central circular route, tokyo gaikan expressway and ken-ō expressway, and to refurbish other major expressways in the area.[7] there are also plans to extend the yurikamome automated transit line from its existing terminal at toyosu station to a new terminal at kachidoki station, passing the site of the olympic village, although the yurikamome would still not have adequate capacity to serve major events in the odaiba area on its own.[8]
the tokyo organizing committee is headed by former prime minister yoshirō mori.[9] olympic and paralympic minister seiko hashimoto is overseeing the preparations on behalf of the japanese government.[10]
in february 2012, it was announced that the national stadium in tokyo, the central venue for the 1964 summer olympics, would undergo a ¥100 billion renovation for the 2019 rugby world cup and the 2020 olympics.[11] in november 2012, the japan sport council announced that it would take bids for proposed designs. of 46 finalists, zaha hadid architects was awarded the project, which would replace the stadium with a new, 80,000-seat stadium. the stadium faced criticism over its design (which was compared to a bicycle helmet, and judged as clashing with the surrounding meiji shrine) and its costs, even with attempts to revise and "optimise" the design.[12]
in june 2015, the government announced that as a further cost-savings measure, it would reduce the new stadium's permanent capacity to 65,000 in its athletics configuration (although with the option to add up to 15,000 temporary seats for football).[13][14] the government also scrapped plans to build a retractable roof.[15] due to public outcry over the increasing costs of the stadium (which reached ¥252 billion), the government ultimately chose to scrap the zaha hadid design entirely, and chose a new design by japanese architect kengo kuma. inspired by traditional temples and having a lower profile, kuma's design has a budget of ¥149 billion. due to the changes in plans, the new stadium would not be completed in time for the rugby world cup as originally planned.[16]
in october 2018, the board of audit issued a report stating that the total cost of the venues could exceed us$25 billion.[17]
of the 33 competition venues in tokyo, 28 are within 8 kilometers (4.97 miles) of the olympic village. eleven new venues are to be constructed.[18] on 16 october 2019, the ioc announced that there were plans to re-locate the marathon and racewalking events to sapporo due to heat concerns.[19] the plans were made official on 1 november 2019 after tokyo governor yuriko koike accepted the ioc's decision, despite her belief that the events should have remained in tokyo.[20]
seven venues for nine sports will be located within the central business area of tokyo, northwest of the olympic village. some of these venues were originally constructed for the 1964 summer olympics.
there will be 13 venues for 15 sports located in the vicinity of tokyo bay, southeast of the olympic village, predominantly on ariake, odaiba and the surrounding artificial islands.
twelve venues for 16 sports will be situated farther than 8 kilometers (5 miles) from the olympic village.
in december 2018, the japanese government chose to ban drones from flying over venues being used for the olympic and paralympic games. a ban was also imposed for the 2019 rugby world cup.[40]
applications for volunteering at the 2020 olympic and paralympic games were accepted from 26 september 2018. by 18 january 2019, a total of 204,680 applications had been received by the tokyo organizing committee.[41] interviews to select the requisite number of volunteers began in february 2019, with training scheduled to take place in october 2019.[42] the volunteers at the venues will be known as "field cast" and the volunteers in the city will be known as "city cast". these names were chosen from a shortlist of four from an original 150 pairs of names; the other three shortlisted names were "shining blue" & "shining blue tokyo", "games anchor" & "city anchor", and "games force" & "city force". the names were chosen by the people who had applied to be volunteers at the games.[43]
in february 2017, the tokyo organizing committee announced an electronics recycling program in partnership with japan environmental sanitation center and ntt docomo, soliciting donations of electronics (such as mobile phones) to be reclaimed as materials for the medals. aiming to collect 8 tonnes of metals to produce the medals for the olympic and paralympic games, collection boxes were deployed at public locations and ntt docomo retail shops in april 2017.[44][45] a design competition for the medals launched in december of the same year.[46]
in may 2018, the organizing committee reported that they had obtained half the required 2,700 kilograms of bronze, but that they were struggling to obtain the required amount of silver; although bronze and silver medals purely utilize their respective materials, ioc requirements mandate that gold medals utilize silver as a base.[47] the collection of bronze was completed in november 2018, with the remainder estimated to be complete by march 2019.[48]
on 24 july 2019, the designs of the medals were unveiled.[49][50] the medals for the olympic and paralympic games were designed by junichi kawanishi following a nationwide competition.[51]
after its traditional lighting in greece, the 2020 summer olympics torch relay will begin in naraha, fukushima on 26 march 2020.[52]
the opening ceremony tickets will range from 12,000 to 300,000 yen, with a maximum price of 130,000 yen for the finals of athletics.[53] the average price of all the olympic tickets is 7,700 yen. 50% of the tickets will be sold for 8,000 yen or less. a symbolic ticket price of 2,020 yen will be for families, groups resident in japan and in conjunction with a school programme. tickets will be sold through 40,000 shops in japan and by mail order to japanese addresses through the internet.[54]  international guests will need to visit japan during the sales period or arrange for tickets through a third party, such as a travel agent.[55]
the official programme for the 2020 summer olympics was approved by the ioc executive board on 9 june 2017. the president of the ioc, thomas bach, stated that the goal for the tokyo summer olympics is to make them more "youthful" and "urban", and to increase the number of female participants.[56][57]
the games will feature 339 events in 33 different sports, encompassing 50 disciplines. alongside the five new sports that will be introduced in tokyo, there will be fifteen new events within existing sports, including 3x3 basketball, freestyle bmx and madison cycling, and new mixed events in several sports.
in the list below, the number of events in each discipline is noted in parentheses.
as part of a goal to control costs and ensure that the olympics remain "relevant to sports fans of all generations", the ioc assessed the 26 sports contested at the 2012 olympics, with the remit of dropping one sport and thus retaining 25 "core" sports to join new entrants golf and rugby sevens at the 2020 games. this move would bring the total number of sports to 27, one less than the requirement of 28 for the 2020 olympics programme, thus leaving a single vacancy that the ioc would seek to fill from a shortlist containing seven unrepresented sports as well as the sport that had been dropped from the 2012 olympics programme.
on 12 february 2013, ioc leaders voted to drop wrestling from the "core" programme for the 2020 games; this was a surprising decision to news outlets given that wrestling is from the ancient olympic games and included in the original programme for the modern games. the new york times felt that the decision was based on the shortage of well-known talent and the absence of women's events in the sport.[58][59][60] wrestling was duly added to the shortlist of applicants for inclusion in the 2020 games, alongside the seven new sports that were put forward for consideration.[58]
on 29 may 2013, it was announced that three of the eight sports under consideration had made the final shortlist: baseball/softball, squash and wrestling.[61] the other five sports were rejected at this point: karate, roller sports, sport climbing, wakeboarding, and wushu.[62] on 8 september 2013, at the 125th ioc session, wrestling was chosen to be included in the olympic programme for 2020 and 2024. wrestling secured 49 votes, while baseball/softball and squash received 24 votes and 22 votes respectively.[63]
under new ioc policies that shift the games to an "event-based" programme rather than sport-based, the host organizing committee can now also propose the addition of sports to the programme. this rule is designed to allow sports that are popular in the host country to be added to the programme, in order to improve local interest.[64] as a result of these changes, a list of eight sports was unveiled on 22 june 2015, consisting of: baseball/softball, bowling, karate, roller sports, sport climbing, squash, surfing, and wushu.[65] on 28 september 2015, the organizers submitted their shortlist of five proposed sports to the ioc: baseball/softball, karate, sport climbing, surfing, and skateboarding.[66] these five new sports were approved on 3 august 2016 by the ioc during the 129th ioc session in rio de janeiro, brazil, and will be included in the sports programme for 2020 only, bringing the total number of sports at the 2020 olympics to 33.[67][68]
a total of 56 test events are scheduled to take place in the run-up to the olympic and paralympic games. two of the events were held in late 2018, but the main test event schedule commenced in june 2019 and is due to be completed in may 2020, prior to the start of the olympics. several of the events are incorporated into pre-existing championships, but some have been newly created specifically to serve as olympic test events for the 2020 summer games.[69][70]
it was announced in february 2019 that the test events would be branded under the banner "ready, steady, tokyo". the tokyo organizing committee is responsible for 22 of the test events, with the remaining events being arranged by national and international sports federations. the first test event was world sailing's world cup series held at enoshima in september 2018, and the last scheduled event is the tokyo challenge track meet due to take place at the olympic stadium in may 2020.[71]
on 9 december 2019, the world anti-doping agency (wada) banned russia from all international sport for a period of four years, after the russian government was found to have tampered with lab data that it provided to wada in january 2019 as a condition of the russian anti-doping agency being reinstated. as a result of the ban, wada will allow individually cleared russian athletes to take part in the 2020 summer olympics under a neutral banner, as instigated at the 2018 winter olympics, but they will not be permitted to compete in team sports. the title of the neutral banner has yet to be determined; wada compliance review committee head jonathan taylor stated that the ioc would not be able to use "olympic athletes from russia" (oar) as it did in 2018, emphasizing that neutral athletes cannot be portrayed as representing a specific country.[72][73][74]
as of 3 january 2020[update], the following 139 nocs are qualified.

the 2020 schedule by session was approved by the ioc executive board on 18 july 2018, with the exception of swimming, diving, and synchronized swimming. a more detailed schedule by event has been released on 16 april 2019, still omitting a detailed schedule for the boxing events.[75][76]

per the historical precedent of swimming at the 2008 summer olympics in beijing and figure skating at the 2018 winter olympics in pyeongchang, swimming finals will be held in the morning to allow live primetime broadcasts in the americas (due to the substantial fees nbc has paid for rights to the olympics, the ioc has allowed nbc to have influence on event scheduling to maximize u.s. television ratings when possible; nbc agreed to a $7.75 billion contract extension on 7 may 2014, to air the olympics through the 2032 games,[77] and is also one of the major sources of revenue for the ioc).[78] japanese broadcasters were said to have criticized the decision, as swimming is one of the most popular olympic events in the country.[79][80]
the official emblems for the 2020 olympics and paralympics were unveiled on 25 april 2016; designed by asao tokolo, who won a nationwide design contest, it takes the form of a ring in an indigo-colored checkerboard pattern. the design is meant to "express a refined elegance and sophistication that exemplifies japan".[81] the designs replaced a previous emblem which had been scrapped due to allegations that it plagiarized the logo of the théâtre de liège in belgium. the games' slogan is discover tomorrow (japanese: .mw-parser-output ruby>rt,.mw-parser-output ruby>rtc{font-feature-settings:"ruby"1}.mw-parser-output ruby.large{font-size:250%}.mw-parser-output ruby.large>rt,.mw-parser-output ruby.large>rtc{font-size:.3em}未来（あした）をつかもう, romanized: ashita o tsukamō). while ashita literally means 'tomorrow', it is intentionally spelled as mirai 'future'.[82]
the official mascot of the 2020 summer olympics is miraitowa, a figure with blue-checkered patterns inspired by the games' official emblem. its fictional characteristics include the ability to teleport.[83] created by japanese artist ryo taniguchi, the mascots were selected from a competition process which took place in late 2017 and early 2018. a total of 2,042 candidate designs were submitted to the tokyo organizing committee, which selected three pairs of unnamed mascot designs to present to japanese elementary school students for the final decision.[84][85] the results of the selection were announced on 28 february 2018, and the mascots were named on 22 july 2018. miraitowa is named after the japanese words for "future" and "eternity", and someity is named after someiyoshino, a type of cherry blossom. someity's name also references the english phrase "so mighty".[86] the mascots are expected to help finance the tokyo games through merchandising and licensing deals.[87]
on december 10, 2018, the french financial crimes office began an investigation of tsunekazu takeda, the president of the japanese olympic committee, about a 2013 scheme to obtain votes from international olympic committee (ioc) members from africa in support of tokyo as host for the 2020 olympics instead of istanbul or madrid.[88][89]
south korea asked the international olympic committee to ban the japanese rising sun flag from the 2020 summer olympics,[90] because the flag is a symbol of japan's imperialist past and recalls "historic scars and pain" for people of korea just as the swastika "reminds europeans of the nightmare of world war ii".[91][92]
russian and south korean officials took issue with a map of the torch relay on the games' official website, which depicted the disputed liancourt rocks (territory claimed by japan but governed by south korea) and kuril islands (territory claimed by japan but governed by russia since 1945) as part of japan.[93]
the olympics torch relay will begin in fukushima, the site of the fukushima daiichi nuclear disaster,[94] and the olympic baseball and softball matches will be played at fukushima stadium, in order to further recovery in the region. the area is considered safe by the world health organization and the united nations,  although scientific studies on the safety of fukushima are currently in great dispute.[95]
sony and panasonic are partnering with nhk to develop broadcasting standards for 8k resolution television, with a goal to release 8k television sets in time for the 2020 olympics.[96][97] italian broadcaster rai announced an intent to deploy 8k broadcasting for the games.[98]
in the united states, the 2020 summer olympics will be broadcast by nbcuniversal properties, as part of a us$4.38 billion agreement that began at the 2014 winter olympics in sochi.[99]
in europe, this will be the first summer olympics under the ioc's exclusive pan-european rights deal with eurosport, which began at the 2018 winter olympics and run through 2024. the rights for the 2020 summer olympics cover almost all of europe, excluding russia due to a pre-existing deal with a marketer through 2024.[100] eurosport will sub-license coverage to free-to-air networks in each territory and other discovery inc.-owned channels. in the united kingdom, these will be the last games whose rights are primarily owned by the bbc, although as a condition of a sub-licensing agreement that will carry into the 2022 and 2024 games, eurosport holds exclusive pay television rights.[101][102][103] in france, these are also the last games whose rights are primarily owned by france télévisions; eurosport will hold pay television rights, as existing rightsholder canal+ chose to sub-license its rights to eurosport as part of network cost-savings measures. france télévisions will sub-license the 2022 and 2024 games from eurosport.[104]
telecom company ntt docomo signed a deal with finland's nokia to provide 5g-ready baseband networks in japan in time for the olympics.[105][106]

the winter olympic games (french: jeux olympiques d'hiver)[nb 1] is a major international multi-sport event held once every four years for sports practiced on snow and ice. the first winter olympic games, the 1924 winter olympics, were held in chamonix, france. the modern olympic games were inspired by the ancient olympic games, which were held in olympia, greece, from the 8th century bc to the 4th century ad. baron pierre de coubertin founded the international olympic committee (ioc) in 1894, leading to the first modern summer olympic games in athens, greece in 1896. the ioc is the governing body of the olympic movement, with the olympic charter defining its structure and authority. 
the original five winter olympic sports (broken into nine disciplines) were bobsleigh, curling, ice hockey, nordic skiing (consisting of the disciplines military patrol,[nb 2] cross-country skiing, nordic combined, and ski jumping), and skating (consisting of the disciplines figure skating and speed skating).[nb 3] the games were held every four years from 1924 to 1936, interrupted in 1940 and 1944 by world war ii, and resumed in 1948. until 1992, the summer olympic games and the winter olympic games were held in the same year, and in accordance with the 1986 decision by the ioc to place the summer olympic games and the winter olympic games on separate four-year cycles in alternating even-numbered years, the next winter olympic games after 1992 were held in 1994.
the winter olympic games have evolved since their inception. sports and disciplines have been added and some of them, such as alpine skiing, luge, short track speed skating, freestyle skiing, skeleton, and snowboarding, have earned a permanent spot on the olympic programme. some others, including curling and bobsleigh, have been discontinued and later reintroduced; others have been permanently discontinued, such as military patrol, though the modern winter olympic sport of biathlon is descended from it.[nb 2] still others, such as speed skiing, bandy and skijoring, were demonstration sports but never incorporated as olympic sports. the rise of television as a global medium for communication enhanced the profile of the games. it generated income via the sale of broadcast rights and advertising, which has become lucrative for the ioc. this allowed outside interests, such as television companies and corporate sponsors, to exert influence. the ioc has had to address numerous criticisms over the decades like internal scandals, the use of performance-enhancing drugs by winter olympians, as well as a political boycott of the winter olympic games. countries have used the winter olympic games as well as the summer olympic games to proclaim the superiority of their political systems.
the winter olympic games have been hosted on three continents by twelve different countries. they have been held four times in the united states (1932, 1960, 1980, and 2002), three times in france (1924, 1968, and 1992) and twice each in austria (1964 and 1976), canada (1988 and 2010), japan (1972 and 1998), italy (1956 and 2006), norway (1952 and 1994) and switzerland (1928 and 1948). also, the winter olympic games have been held just once each in germany (1936), yugoslavia (1984), russia (2014), and south korea (2018). the ioc has selected beijing, china, to host the 2022 winter olympics and the italian cities of milan and cortina d'ampezzo to host the 2026 winter olympics.[6] as of 2018[update], no city in the southern hemisphere has applied to host the cold-weather-dependent winter olympic games, which are held in february at the height of the southern hemisphere's summer.
to date, twelve countries have participated in every winter olympic games – austria, canada, finland, france, great britain, hungary, italy, norway, poland, sweden, switzerland and the united states. six of these countries have won medals at every winter olympic games – austria, canada, finland, norway, sweden, and the united states. the only country to have won a gold medal at every winter olympic games is the united states. norway leads the all-time olympic games medal table for winter olympic games. when including defunct states, germany (including the former countries of west germany and east germany) leads, followed by norway and russia (including the former soviet union).
 a predecessor, the nordic games, were organised by general viktor gustaf balck in stockholm, sweden, in 1901 and were held again in 1903 and 1905 and then every fourth year thereafter until 1926.[7] balck was a charter member of the ioc and a close friend of olympic games founder pierre de coubertin. he attempted to have winter sports, specifically figure skating, added to the olympic programme but was unsuccessful until the 1908 summer olympics in london, united kingdom.[7] four figure skating events were contested, at which ulrich salchow (10-time world champion) and madge syers won the individual titles.[8][9]
three years later, italian count eugenio brunetta d'usseaux proposed that the ioc stage a week of winter sports included as part of the 1912 summer olympics in stockholm, sweden. the organisers opposed this idea because they desired to protect the integrity of the nordic games and were concerned about a lack of facilities for winter sports.[10][11][12]
the idea was resurrected for the 1916 games, which were to be held in berlin, germany. a winter sports week with speed skating, figure skating, ice hockey and nordic skiing was planned, but the 1916 olympics was cancelled after the outbreak of world war i.[11]
the first olympics after the war, the 1920 summer olympics, were held in antwerp, belgium, and featured figure skating and an ice hockey tournament.[11] germany, austria, hungary, bulgaria and turkey were banned from competing in the games. at the ioc congress held the following year it was decided that the host nation of the 1924 summer olympics, france, would host a separate "international winter sports week" under the patronage of the ioc. chamonix was chosen to host this "week" (actually 11 days) of events. the games proved to be a success when more than 250 athletes from 16 nations competed in 16 events.[13] athletes from finland and norway won 28 medals, more than the rest of the participating nations combined.[14] germany remained banned until 1925, and instead hosted a series of games called deutsche kampfspiele, starting with the winter edition of 1922 (which predated the first winter olympics). in 1925 the ioc decided to create a separate winter event and the 1924 games in chamonix was retroactively designated as the first winter olympics.[11][13]
st. moritz, switzerland, was appointed by the ioc to host the second winter games in 1928.[15] fluctuating weather conditions challenged the hosts. the opening ceremony was held in a blizzard while warm weather conditions plagued sporting events throughout the rest of the games.[16] because of the weather the 10,000 metre speed-skating event had to be abandoned and officially cancelled.[17] the weather was not the only noteworthy aspect of the 1928 games: sonja henie of norway made history when she won the figure skating competition at the age of 15. she became the youngest olympic champion in history, a distinction she held for 70 years.[18]
the next winter olympics, held in lake placid, new york, was the first to be hosted outside of europe. seventeen nations and 252 athletes participated.[19] this was less than in 1928, as the journey to lake placid was long and expensive for most competitors, who had little money in the midst of the great depression. the athletes competed in fourteen events in four sports.[19] virtually no snow fell for two months before the games, and there was not enough snow to hold all the events until mid-january.[20] sonja henie defended her olympic title, and eddie eagan of the united states, who had been an olympic champion in boxing in 1920, won the gold medal in the men's bobsleigh event to become the first, and so far only, olympian to have won gold medals in both the summer and winter olympics.[19]
the german towns of garmisch and partenkirchen joined to organise the 1936 edition of the winter games, held from 6–16 february.[21] this was the last time the summer and winter olympics were held in the same country in the same year. alpine skiing made its olympic debut, but skiing teachers were barred from entering because they were considered to be professionals.[22] because of this decision the swiss and austrian skiers refused to compete at the games.[22]
world war ii interrupted the holding of the winter olympics. the 1940 games had been awarded to sapporo, japan, but the decision was rescinded in 1938 because of the japanese invasion of china. the games were then to be held at garmisch-partenkirchen, germany, but the 1940 games were cancelled following the german invasion of poland in 1939.[23] due to the ongoing war, the 1944 games, originally scheduled for cortina d'ampezzo, italy, were cancelled.[24]
st. moritz was selected to host the first post-war games, in 1948. switzerland's neutrality had protected the town during world war ii, and most of the venues were in place from the 1928 games, which made st. moritz a logical choice. it became the first city to host a winter olympics twice.[25] twenty-eight countries competed in switzerland, but athletes from germany and japan were not invited.[26] controversy erupted when two hockey teams from the united states arrived, both claiming to be the legitimate u.s. olympic hockey representative. the olympic flag presented at the 1920 summer olympics in antwerp was stolen, as was its replacement. there was unprecedented parity at these games, during which 10 countries won gold medals—more than any games to that point.[27]
the olympic flame for the 1952 games in oslo, was lit in the fireplace by skiing pioneer sondre nordheim, and the torch relay was conducted by 94 participants entirely on skis.[28][29] bandy, a popular sport in the nordic countries, was featured as a demonstration sport, though only norway, sweden, and finland fielded teams. norwegian athletes won 17 medals, which outpaced all the other nations.[30] they were led by hjalmar andersen who won three gold medals in four events in the speed skating competition.[31]
after not being able to host the games in 1944, cortina d'ampezzo was selected to organise the 1956 winter olympics. at the opening ceremonies the final torch bearer, guido caroli, entered the olympic stadium on ice skates. as he skated around the stadium his skate caught on a cable and he fell, nearly extinguishing the flame. he was able to recover and light the cauldron.[32] these were the first winter games to be televised, and the first olympics ever broadcast to an international audience, though no television rights were sold until the 1960 summer olympics in rome.[33] the cortina games were used to test the feasibility of televising large sporting events.[33] the soviet union made its olympic debut and had an immediate impact, winning more medals than any other nation.[34] the soviets' immediate success might be explained by the advent of the state-sponsored "full-time amateur athlete". the ussr entered teams of athletes who were all nominally students, soldiers, or working in a profession, but many of whom were in reality paid by the state to train full-time.[35][36] chiharu igaya won the first winter olympics medal for japan and the continent of asia when he placed second in the slalom.[37]
the ioc awarded the 1960 olympics to squaw valley, united states. it was an undeveloped resort in 1955, so from 1956 to 1960 the infrastructure and all of the venues were built at a cost of us$80,000,000.[38][39] the opening and closing ceremonies were produced by walt disney.[40] the squaw valley olympics was the first winter games to have a dedicated athletes' village,[citation needed] the first to use a computer (courtesy of ibm) to tabulate results, and the first to feature female speed skating events. the bobsleigh events were absent for the only time due to the cost of building a bobsleigh run.[40]
the austrian city of innsbruck was the host in 1964. although innsbruck was a traditional winter sports resort, warm weather caused a lack of snow during the games and the austrian army was enlisted to transport snow and ice to the sports venues.[40] soviet speed-skater lidia skoblikova made history by winning all four speed skating events. her career total of six gold medals set a record for winter olympics athletes.[40] luge was first contested in 1964, but the sport received bad publicity when a competitor was killed in a pre-olympic training run.[41][42]
held in the french town of grenoble, the 1968 winter olympics were the first olympic games to be broadcast in colour. there were 1,158 athletes from 37 nations competing in 35 events.[43] french alpine ski racer jean-claude killy became only the second person to win all the men's alpine skiing events. the organising committee sold television rights for us$2 million, which was more than twice the cost of the broadcast rights for the innsbruck games.[44] venues were spread over long distances requiring three athletes' villages. the organisers claimed that this was necessary to accommodate technological advances, however critics disputed this, alleging that the layout would incorporate the best possible venues for television broadcasts at the athletes' expense.[44]
the 1972 winter games, held in sapporo, japan, were the first to be hosted on a continent other than north america or europe. the issue of professionalism was disputed during these games when a number of alpine skiers were found to have participated in a ski camp at mammoth mountain in the united states; three days before the opening ceremony, ioc president avery brundage threatened to bar the skiers from competing in the games as he insisted that they were no longer amateurs having benefited financially from their status as athletes.[45] eventually only austrian karl schranz, who earned more than the other skiers, was excluded from the competition.[46] canada did not send teams to the 1972 or 1976 ice hockey tournaments in protest at not being able to use players from professional leagues.[47] it also accused the soviet union of using state-sponsored athletes, who were de facto professionals.[48] francisco fernández ochoa became the first (and, as of 2018, only) spaniard to win a winter olympic gold medal when he triumphed in the slalom.[49]
the 1976 winter olympics had initially been awarded in 1970 to denver, colorado in the united states. these games would have coincided with the year of colorado's centennial and the united states bicentennial. however, in november 1972 the people of colorado voted against public funding of the games by a 3:2 margin.[50][51] the ioc responded by offering the games to vancouver-garibaldi, british columbia, which had previously been an official candidate for the 1976 games. however, a change in the provincial government resulted in an administration that did not support the olympic bid, so the ioc's offer was rejected. salt lake city, previously a candidate for the 1972 winter olympics, then put itself forward, but the ioc opted instead to invite innsbruck to host the 1976 games, as most of the infrastructure from the 1964 games had been maintained. despite only having half the usual time to prepare for the games, innsbruck accepted the invitation to replace denver in february 1973.[52] two olympic flames were lit because it was the second time that the austrian town had hosted the winter games.[52] the 1976 games featured the first combination bobsleigh and luge track, in neighbouring igls.[49] the soviet union won its fourth consecutive ice hockey gold medal.[52]
in 1980 the winter olympics returned to lake placid, which had hosted the 1932 games. the first boycott of a winter olympics took place at these games, when taiwan refused to participate after an edict by the ioc mandated that they change their name and national anthem.[53] this was an attempt by the ioc to accommodate china, who wished to compete using the same name and anthem as those used by taiwan.[53] as a result, china participated for the first time since 1952. american speed-skater eric heiden set either an olympic or world record in every one of the five events in which he competed, winning a total of five individual gold medals and breaking the record for most individual golds in a single olympics (both summer and winter).[54] hanni wenzel won both the slalom and giant slalom and her country, liechtenstein, became the smallest nation to produce an olympic gold medallist.[55] in the "miracle on ice", the american hockey team composed of college players beat the favoured seasoned professionals from the soviet union, and progressed to eventually win the gold medal.[56][nb 4]
sapporo, japan, and gothenburg, sweden, were front-runners to host the 1984 winter olympics. it was therefore a surprise when sarajevo, yugoslavia, was selected as host.[59] the games were well-organised and not affected by the run-up to the war that engulfed the country eight years later.[60] a total of 49 nations and 1,272 athletes participated in 39 events. host nation yugoslavia won its first olympic medal when alpine skier jure franko won silver in the giant slalom. another sporting highlight was the free dance performance of british ice dancers jayne torvill and christopher dean; their boléro routine received unanimous perfect scores for artistic impression, earning them the gold medal.[60]
in 1988, the canadian city of calgary hosted the first winter olympics to span three weekends, lasting for a total of 16 days.[61] new events were added in ski-jumping and speed skating, while future olympic sports curling, short track speed skating and freestyle skiing made their debut appearance as demonstration sports. the speed skating events were held indoors for the first time, on the olympic oval. dutch skater yvonne van gennip won three gold medals and set two world records, beating skaters from the favoured east german team in every race.[62] her medal total was equalled by finnish ski jumper matti nykänen, who won all three events in his sport. alberto tomba, an italian skier, made his olympic debut by winning both the giant slalom and slalom. east german christa rothenburger won the women's 1,000 metre speed skating event. seven months later she would earn a silver in track cycling at the summer games in seoul, to become the only athlete to win medals in both a summer and winter olympics in the same year.[61]
the 1992 winter games were the last to be held in the same year as the summer games.[63] they were hosted in the french savoie region, with 18 events held in the city of albertville and the remaining events spread out over the savoie.[63] political changes of the time were reflected in the composition of the olympic teams competing in france: this was the first games to be held after the fall of communism and the fall of the berlin wall, and germany competed as a single nation for the first time since the 1964 games; former yugoslavian republics croatia and slovenia made their debuts as independent nations; most of the former soviet republics still competed as a single team known as the unified team, but the baltic states made independent appearances for the first time since before world war ii.[64] at 16 years old, finnish ski jumper toni nieminen made history by becoming the youngest male winter olympic champion.[65] new zealand skier annelise coberger became the first winter olympic medallist from the southern hemisphere when she won a silver medal in the women's slalom.
the 1994 winter olympics, held in lillehammer, norway, were the first winter games to be held separately from the summer games. this change resulted from the decision reached in the 91st ioc session (1986) to separate the summer and winter games and place them in alternating even-numbered years.[66] lillehammer is the northernmost city to ever host the winter games. it was the second time the games were held in norway, after the 1952 winter olympics in oslo, and the first time the olympic truce was observed. as a result, after the dissolution of czechoslovakia in 1993, the czech republic and slovakia made their olympic debuts.[67] the women's figure skating competition drew media attention when american skater nancy kerrigan was injured on 6 january 1994, in an assault planned by the ex-husband of opponent tonya harding.[68] both skaters competed in the games, but the gold medal was controversially won by oksana baiul who became ukraine's first olympic champion, while kerrigan won the silver medal.[69][70] johann olav koss of norway won three gold medals, coming first in all of the distance speed skating events.[71] 13-year-old kim yoon-mi became the youngest-ever olympic gold medallist when south korea won the women's 3,000 meter speed skating relay. bjørn dæhli of norway won a medal in four out of five cross-country events, becoming the most decorated winter olympian until then. russia won the most events, with eleven gold medals, while norway achieved 26 podium finishes, collecting the most medals overall on home ground. juan antonio samaranch described lillehammer as "the best olympic winter games ever" in his closing ceremony speech.[72]
the 1998 winter olympics were held in the japanese city of nagano and were the first games to host more than 2,000 athletes.[73] the men's ice hockey tournament was opened to nhl players for the first time. canada and the united states were favoured to win the tournament as they both fielded more nhl players than european countries,[73] but surprisingly neither team won any medals and it was the czech republic who prevailed. the czech team was mainly composed of domestic pros with some additions from the nhl[73] the tournament was played under the ihhf rules, which were unfamiliar to many nhlers. women's ice hockey made its debut and the united states won the gold medal.[74] bjørn dæhlie of norway won three gold medals in nordic skiing, becoming the most decorated winter olympic athlete, with eight gold medals and twelve medals overall.[73][75] austrian hermann maier survived a crash during the downhill competition and returned to win gold in the super-g and the giant slalom.[73] tara lipinski of the united states, aged just 15, became the youngest ever female gold medallist in an individual event when she won the ladies' singles, a record that had stood since sonja henie of norway won the same event, also aged 15, in st. moritz in 1928. new world records were set in speed skating largely due to the introduction of the clap skate.[76]
the 2002 winter olympics were held in salt lake city, united states, hosting 77 nations and 2,399 athletes in 78 events in 7 sports.[77] these games were the first to take place since the september 11 attacks of 2001, which meant a higher degree of security to avoid a terrorist attack. the opening ceremony saw signs of the aftermath of the events of that day, including the flag that flew at ground zero, and honour guards of nypd and fdny members.[78]
german georg hackl won a silver in the singles luge, becoming the first athlete in olympic history to win medals in the same individual event in five consecutive olympics.[77] canada achieved an unprecedented double by winning both the men's and women's ice hockey gold medals.[77] canada became embroiled with russia in a controversy that involved the judging of the pairs figure skating competition. the russian pair of yelena berezhnaya and anton sikharulidze competed against the canadian pair of jamie salé and david pelletier for the gold medal. the canadians appeared to have skated well enough to win the competition, yet the russians were awarded the gold. the french judge, marie-reine le gougne, awarded the gold to the russians. an investigation revealed that she had been pressured to give the gold to the russian pair regardless of how they skated; in return the russian judge would look favourably on the french entrants in the ice dancing competition.[79] the ioc decided to award both pairs the gold medal in a second medal ceremony held later in the games.[80] australian steven bradbury became the first gold medallist from the southern hemisphere when he won the 1,000 metre short-track speed skating event.[81]
the italian city of turin hosted the 2006 winter olympics. it was the second time that italy had hosted the winter olympic games. south korean athletes won 10 medals, including 6 gold in the short-track speed skating events. sun-yu jin won three gold medals while her teammate hyun-soo ahn won three gold medals and a bronze.[82] in the women's cross-country team pursuit canadian sara renner broke one of her poles and, when he saw her dilemma, norwegian coach bjørnar håkensmoen decided to lend her a pole. in so doing she was able to help her team win a silver medal in the event at the expense of the norwegian team, who finished fourth.[82][83] on winning the super-g, kjetil-andre aamodt of norway became the most decorated ski racer of all time with 4 gold and 8 overall medals. he is also the only ski racer to have won the same event at three different olympics, winning the super-g in 1992, 2002 and 2006. claudia pechstein of germany became the first speed skater to earn nine career medals.[82] in february 2009, pechstein tested positive for "blood manipulation" and received a two-year suspension, which she appealed. the court of arbitration for sport upheld her suspension but a swiss court ruled that she could compete for a spot on the 2010 german olympic team.[84] this ruling was brought to the swiss federal tribunal, which overturned the lower court's ruling and precluded her from competing in vancouver.[85]
in 2003 the ioc awarded the 2010 winter olympics to vancouver, thus allowing canada to host its second winter olympics. with a population of more than 2.5 million people vancouver is the largest metropolitan area to ever host a winter olympic games.[86] over 2,500 athletes from 82 countries participated in 86 events.[87] the death of georgian luger nodar kumaritashvili in a training run on the day of the opening ceremonies resulted in the whistler sliding centre changing the track layout on safety grounds.[88] norwegian cross-country skier marit bjørgen won five medals in the six cross-country events on the women's programme. she finished the olympics with three golds, a silver and a bronze.[89] for the first time, canada won a gold medal at an olympic games it hosted, having failed to do so at both the 1976 summer olympics in montreal and the 1988 winter olympics in calgary. in contrast to the lack of gold medals at these previous olympics, the canadian team finished first overall in gold medal wins,[90] and became the first host nation—since norway in 1952—to lead the gold medal count, with 14 medals. in doing so, it also broke the record for the most gold medals won by a noc at a single winter olympics (the previous was 13, set by the soviet union in 1976 and matched by norway in 2002).[91] the vancouver games were notable for the poor performance of the russian athletes. from their first winter olympics in 1956 to the 2006 games, a soviet or russian delegation had never been outside the top five medal-winning nations, but in 2010 they finished sixth in total medals and eleventh in gold medals. president dmitry medvedev called for the resignation of top sports officials immediately after the games.[92] russia's disappointing performance at vancouver is cited as the reason behind the implementation of a doping scheme alleged to have been in operation at major events such as the 2014 games at sochi.[93] the success of asian countries stood in stark contrast to the under-performing russian team, with vancouver marking a high point for medals won by asian countries. in 1992 the asian countries had won fifteen medals, three of which were gold. in vancouver the total number of medals won by athletes from asia had increased to thirty-one, with eleven of them being gold. the rise of asian nations in winter olympics sports is due in part to the growth of winter sports programmes and the interest in winter sports in nations such as south korea, japan and china.[94][95]
sochi, russia, was selected as the host city for the 2014 winter olympics over salzburg, austria, and pyeongchang, south korea. this was the first time that russia had hosted a winter olympics.[96] the games took place from 7 to 23 february 2014.[97] a record 2,800 athletes from 88 countries competed in 98 events. the olympic village and olympic stadium were located on the black sea coast. all of the mountain venues were 50 kilometres (31 miles) away in the alpine region known as krasnaya polyana.[96] the games were the most expensive so far, with a cost of £30 billion (usd 51 billion).
on the snow, norwegian biathlete ole einar bjørndalen took two golds to bring his total tally of olympic medals to 13, overtaking his compatriot bjørn dæhlie to become the most decorated winter olympian of all time. another norwegian, cross-country skier marit bjørgen took three golds; her total of ten olympic medals tied her as the female winter olympian with most medals, alongside raisa smetanina and stefania belmondo. snowboarder ayumu hirano became the youngest medallist on snow at the winter games when he took a silver in the halfpipe competition at the age of fifteen. on the ice, the dutch dominated the speed skating events, taking 23 medals, four clean sweeps of the podium places and at least one medal in each of the twelve medal events. ireen wüst was their most successful competitor, taking two golds and three silvers. in figure skating, yuzuru hanyu became the first skater to break the 100-point barrier in the short programme on the way to winning the gold medal. among the sledding disciplines, luger armin zöggeler took a bronze, becoming the first winter olympian to secure a medal in six consecutive games.[96]
following their disappointing performance at the 2010 games, and an investment of £600 million in elite sport, russia initially topped the medal table, taking 33 medals including thirteen golds.[98] however grigory rodchenkov, the former head of the russian national anti-doping laboratory, subsequently claimed that he had been involved in doping dozens of russian competitors for the games, and that he had been assisted by the russian federal security service in opening and re-sealing bottles containing urine samples so that samples with banned substances could be replaced with "clean" urine. a subsequent investigation commissioned by the world anti-doping agency led by richard mclaren concluded that a state-sponsored doping programme had operated in russia from "at least late 2011 to 2015" across the "vast majority" of summer and winter olympic sports.[99] on 5 december 2017, the ioc announced that russia would be banned from the 2018 winter olympics with immediate effect[100] and by the end of 2017 the ioc disciplinary commission had disqualified 43 russian athletes, stripping thirteen medals and knocking russia from the top of the medal table, thus putting norway in the lead.[101][102][103]
on 6 july 2011, pyeongchang, south korea, was selected to host the 2018 winter olympics over munich, germany, and annecy, france.[104] this was the first time that south korea had been selected to host a winter olympics and it was the second time the olympics were held in the country overall, after the 1988 summer olympics in seoul. the games took place from 9 to 25 february 2018. more than 2,900 athletes from 92 countries participated in 102 events. the olympic stadium and many of the sports venues were situated in the alpensia resort in daegwallyeong-myeon, pyeongchang, while a number of other sports venues were located in the gangneung olympic park in pyeongchang's neighboring city of gangneung.
the lead-up to the 2018 winter olympics was affected by the tensions between north and south korea and the ongoing russian doping scandal. despite tense relations, north korea agreed to participate in the games, enter with south korea during the opening ceremony as a unified korea, and field a unified team in women's ice hockey. individual russian athletes, who qualified and could demonstrate they had complied with the ioc's doping regulations, were given the option to compete neutrally in pyeongchang as "olympic athletes from russia" (oar) but they were not allowed to compete under the russian flag.[100]
the games saw the addition of big air snowboarding, mass start speed skating, mixed doubles curling, and mixed team alpine skiing to the programme. on the ice, the netherlands again dominated the speed skating, winning gold medals in seven of the ten individual events. dutch speed skater sven kramer won gold in the men's 5000m event, becoming the only male speed skater to win the same olympic event three times. on the snow, norway led the medal tally in cross-country skiing, with marit bjørgen winning bronze in the women's team sprint and gold in the 30 kilometre classical event, bringing her total olympic medal haul to fifteen, the most won by any athlete (male or female) in winter olympics history. johannes høsflot klæbo became the youngest ever male to win an olympic gold in cross-country skiing when he won the men's sprint at age 21. noriaki kasai of japan became the first athlete in history to participate in eight winter olympics when he took part in the ski jumping qualification the day before the opening of the games. ester ledecká of the czech republic won gold in the skiing super-g event and another gold in the snowboarding parallel giant slalom, making her the first female athlete to win olympic gold medals in two different sports at a single winter games.
norway led the total medal standings with 39, the highest number of medals by a nation in any winter olympics, followed by germany's 31 and canada's 29. host nation south korea won seventeen medals, its highest medal haul at a winter olympics.
the host city for the 2022 winter olympics is beijing, the capital of the people's republic of china, elected on 31 july 2015 at the 128th ioc session in kuala lumpur. beijing will be the first city ever to have hosted both the summer and winter olympics. the 2022 winter olympics will take place between 4 and 20 february 2022. the 2026 winter olympics will be in milan-cortina d'ampezzo, italy and take place between 6 and 22 february 2026.
the process for awarding host city honours came under intense scrutiny after salt lake city had been awarded the right to host the 2002 games.[105] soon after the host city had been announced it was discovered that the organisers had engaged in an elaborate bribery scheme to curry favour with ioc officials.[105] gifts and other financial considerations were given to those who would evaluate and vote on salt lake city's bid. these gifts included medical treatment for relatives, a college scholarship for one member's son and a land deal in utah. even ioc president juan antonio samaranch received two rifles valued at $2,000. samaranch defended the gift as inconsequential since, as president, he was a non-voting member.[106] the subsequent investigation uncovered inconsistencies in the bids for every olympics (both summer and winter) since 1988.[107] for example, the gifts received by ioc members from the japanese organising committee for nagano's bid for the 1998 winter olympics were described by the investigation committee as "astronomical".[108] although nothing strictly illegal had been done, the ioc feared that corporate sponsors would lose faith in the integrity of the process and that the olympic brand would be tarnished to such an extent that advertisers would begin to pull their support.[109] the investigation resulted in the expulsion of 10 ioc members and the sanctioning of another 10. new terms and age limits were established for ioc membership, and 15 former olympic athletes were added to the committee. stricter rules for future bids were imposed, with ceilings imposed on the value of gifts ioc members could accept from bid cities.[110][111][112]
according to the ioc, the host city for the winter olympics is responsible for "...establishing functions and services for all aspects of the games, such as sports planning, venues, finance, technology, accommodation, catering, media services, etc., as well as operations during the games."[113] due to the cost of hosting the games, most host cities never realise a profit on their investment.[114] for example, the 2006 winter olympics in turin, italy, cost $3.6 billion to host. by comparison, the 1998 winter olympics in nagano, japan, cost $12.5 billion.[115] the organisers of the nagano games claimed that the cost of extending the bullet train service from tokyo to nagano was responsible for the large price tag.[115] the organising committee had hoped that the exposure gained from hosting the winter olympics, and the improved access to nagano from tokyo, would benefit the local economy for years afterwards. in actual fact, nagano's economy did experience a post-olympic boom for a year or two, but the long-term effects have not materialised as anticipated.[115] the likelihood of heavy debt is a deterrent to prospective host cities, as well as the prospect of unused sports venues and infrastructure saddling the local community with upkeep costs into the future with no appreciable post-olympic value.[116]
the winter olympics has the added problem of the alpine events requiring a mountain location; the men's downhill needs an 800-meter altitude difference along a suitable course. as this is a focal event that is central to the games, the ioc has previously not agreed to it taking place a great distance from the main host city.[117] (in opposite to the summer games where sailing and horse sports have taken place more than 1000 km away) the requirement for a mountain location also means that venues such as hockey arenas often have to be built in sparsely populated areas with little future need for a large arena and for the hotels and infrastructure needed for all olympic visitors. due to cost issues, the only candidate cities for the 2022 winter olympics were in dictatorship countries, and a number of european countries declined due to political doubt over costs. both the 2006 and 2010 games, which were hosted in countries where large cities are located close to suitable mountain regions, had lower costs since more venues, hotels and transport infrastructure already existed. in contrast the 2014 games had large cost due to most installations had to be built.
the ioc has enacted several initiatives to mitigate these concerns. firstly, the commission has agreed to fund part of the host city's budget for staging the games.[118] secondly, the qualifying host countries are limited to those that have the resources and infrastructure to successfully host an olympic games without negatively impacting the region or nation; this consequently rules out a large portion of the developing world.[119] finally, any prospective host city planning to bid for the games is required to add a "legacy plan" to their 
proposal, with a view to the long-term economic and environmental impact that hosting the olympics will have on the region.[120]
for the 2022 winter games, ioc allowed a longer distance between the alpine events and other events. the oslo bid had 220 kilometres (140 mi) to the kvitfjell downhill arena. for the 2026 winter games, ioc allowed stockholm to have the alpine event in åre, 620 kilometres (390 mi) away (road distance).
in 1967 the ioc began enacting drug testing protocols. they started by randomly testing athletes at the 1968 winter olympics.[121] the first winter games athlete to test positive for a banned substance was alois schloder, a west german hockey player,[122] but his team was still allowed to compete.[123] during the 1970s testing outside of competition was escalated because it was found to deter athletes from using performance-enhancing drugs.[124] the problem with testing during this time was a lack of standardisation of the test procedures, which undermined the credibility of the tests. it was not until the late 1980s that international sporting federations began to coordinate efforts to standardise the drug-testing protocols.[125] the ioc took the lead in the fight against steroids when it established the independent world anti-doping agency (wada) in november 1999.[126][127]
the 2006 winter olympics in turin became notable for a scandal involving the emerging trend of blood doping, the use of blood transfusions or synthetic hormones such as erythropoietin (epo) to improve oxygen flow and thus reduce fatigue.[128] the italian police conducted a raid on the austrian cross-country ski team's residence during the games where they seized blood-doping specimens and equipment.[129] this event followed the pre-olympics suspension of 12 cross-country skiers who tested positive for unusually high levels of haemoglobin, which is evidence of blood doping.[128]
the 2014 winter olympics in sochi's russian doping scandal has resulted in the international olympic committee to begin disciplinary proceedings against 28 (later increased to 46) russian athletes who competed at the 2014 winter games in sochi, russia, acting on evidence that their urine samples were tampered with.[130][131][132][133][134]
the winter olympics have been an ideological front in the cold war since the soviet union first participated at the 1956 winter games. it did not take long for the cold war combatants to discover what a powerful propaganda tool the olympic games could be. the advent of the state-sponsored "full-time amateur athlete" of the eastern bloc countries further eroded the ideology of the pure amateur, as it put the self-financed amateurs of the western countries at a disadvantage. the soviet union entered teams of athletes who were all nominally students, soldiers, or working in a profession, but many of whom were in reality paid by the state to train on a full-time basis.[35] nevertheless, the ioc held to the traditional rules regarding amateurism until the '90s.[36]
the cold war created tensions amongst countries allied to the two superpowers. the strained relationship between east and west germany created a difficult political situation for the ioc. because of its role in world war ii, germany was not allowed to compete at the 1948 winter olympics.[26] in 1950 the ioc recognised the west german olympic committee, and invited east and west germany to compete as a unified team at the 1952 winter games.[135] east germany declined the invitation and instead sought international legitimacy separate from west germany.[136] in 1955 the soviet union recognised east germany as a sovereign state, thereby giving more credibility to east germany's campaign to become an independent participant at the olympics. the ioc agreed to provisionally accept the east german national olympic committee with the condition that east and west germans compete on one team.[137] the situation became tenuous when the berlin wall was constructed in 1962 and western nations began refusing visas to east german athletes.[138] the uneasy compromise of a unified team held until the 1968 grenoble games when the ioc officially split the teams and threatened to reject the host-city bids of any country that refused entry visas to east german athletes.[139]
the winter games have had only one national team boycott when taiwan decided not to participate in the 1980 winter olympics held in lake placid. prior to the games the ioc agreed to allow china to compete in the olympics for the first time since 1952. china was given permission to compete as the "people's republic of china" (prc) and to use the prc flag and anthem. until 1980 the island of taiwan had been competing under the name "republic of china" (roc) and had been using the roc flag and anthem.[53] the ioc attempted to have the countries compete together but when this proved to be unacceptable the ioc demanded that taiwan cease to call itself the "republic of china".[140][141] the ioc renamed the island "chinese taipei" and demanded that it adopt a different flag and national anthem, stipulations that taiwan would not agree to. despite numerous appeals and court hearings the ioc's decision stood. when the taiwanese athletes arrived at the olympic village with their republic of china identification cards they were not admitted. they subsequently left the olympics in protest, just before the opening ceremonies.[53] taiwan returned to olympic competition at the 1984 winter games in sarajevo as chinese taipei. the country agreed to compete under a flag bearing the emblem of their national olympic committee and to play the anthem of their national olympic committee should one of their athletes win a gold medal. the agreement remains in place to this day.[142]
the olympic charter limits winter sports to "those ... which are practised on snow or ice."[143] since 1992 a number of new sports have been added to the olympic programme; which include short track speed skating, snowboarding, freestyle and moguls skiing. the addition of these events has broadened the appeal of the winter olympics beyond europe and north america. while european powers such as norway and germany still dominate the traditional winter olympic sports, countries such as south korea, australia and canada are finding success in the new sports. the results are: more parity in the national medal tables; more interest in the winter olympics; and higher global television ratings.[144]
^ note 1. figure skating events were held at the 1908 and 1920 summer olympics.
^ note 2. a men's ice hockey tournament was held at the 1920 summer olympics.
^ note 3. the ioc's website now treats men's military patrol at the 1924 games as an event within the sport of biathlon.[nb 2]
demonstration sports have historically provided a venue for host countries to attract publicity to locally popular sports by having a competition without granting medals. demonstration sports were discontinued after 1992.[160] military patrol, a precursor to the biathlon, was a medal sport in 1924 and was demonstrated in 1928, 1936 and 1948, becoming an official sport in 1960.[161] the special figures figure skating event was only contested at the 1908 summer olympics.[162] bandy (russian hockey) is a sport popular in the nordic countries and russia. in the latter it's considered a national sport.[163] it was demonstrated at the oslo games.[164] ice stock sport, a german variant of curling, was demonstrated in 1936 in germany and 1964 in austria.[22] the ski ballet event, later known as ski-acro, was demonstrated in 1988 and 1992.[165] skijöring, skiing behind dogs, was a demonstration sport in st. moritz in 1928.[164] a sled-dog race was held at lake placid in 1932.[164] speed skiing was demonstrated in albertville at the 1992 winter olympics.[166] winter pentathlon, a variant of the modern pentathlon, was included as a demonstration event at the 1948 games in switzerland. it included cross-country skiing, shooting, downhill skiing, fencing and horse riding.[146]
the table below uses official data provided by the ioc.
unlike the summer olympics, the cancelled 1940 winter olympics and 1944 winter olympics are not included in the official roman numeral counts for the winter games. while the official titles of the summer games count olympiads, the titles of the winter games only count the games themselves.

bibliography
the 1924 winter olympics, officially known as the i olympic winter games (french: les iers jeux olympiques d'hiver), were a winter multi-sport event which was held in 1924 in chamonix, france. originally held in association with the 1924 summer olympics, the sports competitions were held at the foot of mont blanc in chamonix, and haute-savoie, france between january 25 and february 5, 1924.[1]  the games were organized by the french olympic committee, and were originally reckoned as the "international winter sports week." with the success of the event, it was retroactively designated by the international olympic committee (ioc) as the i olympic winter games.
the tradition of holding the winter olympics in the same year as the summer olympics would continue until 1992, after which the current practice of holding a winter olympics in the second year after each summer olympics began.
although figure skating had been an olympic event in both london and antwerp, and ice hockey had been an event in antwerp, the winter sports had always been limited by the season. in 1921, at the convention of the ioc in lausanne, there was a call for equality for winter sports, and after much discussion it was decided to organize an "international week of winter sport" in 1924 in chamonix.
the first gold medal awarded in the olympic winter games was won by charles jewtraw of the united states in the 500-meter speed skate.
sonja henie, at just eleven years old, skates in the ladies' figure skating competition. although she finishes last, she becomes popular with fans. henie went on to take gold at the next three winter olympics.
the figure skater gillis grafström was the first one to successfully defend his summer olympics title at the winter olympics.
the canadian ice hockey team (toronto granites) finished their qualifying round with three wins, scoring a total of 85 goals against switzerland, czechoslovakia, and sweden without surrendering even a single goal against.
finding themselves in the same situation as gillis grafström, the canadian ice-hockey team is the last ever to successfully defend its summer olympics title at the winter olympics. canada would dominate ice hockey in early olympic competition, winning six of the first seven gold medals awarded.
at the closing of the games a prize was awarded for a sport that did not lend itself very well for tournaments: pierre de coubertin presented a prize for 'alpinisme' (mountaineering) to charles granville bruce, the leader of the expedition that tried to climb mount everest in 1922.
for the first time in the history of the modern olympics, the host country, in this case, france, failed to win any gold medals, finishing with three bronze medals. this feat would later occur at the next winter olympics in st. moritz where switzerland won only a single bronze medal, the lowest ever output by a host nation at an olympics. later host nations to finish without gold medals included canada at the 1976 summer olympics in montreal and 1988 winter olympics in calgary and yugoslavia at the 1984 winter olympics in sarajevo.
in 1925, the ioc decided to organize olympic winter games every four years, independent of the olympic games proper, and recognized the international winter sports week as the first olympic winter games in retrospect.
in 1974 the final individual medal of chamonix 1924 was presented. anders haugen, who until then had been recorded as finishing fourth in the ski jumping event, received a bronze medal. after fifty years an error had been discovered in the score of thorleif haug.
in 2006, the ioc confirmed that the awarded medals to 1924 curling teams were official. the ioc verified that curling was officially part of the program, after the glasgow herald newspaper filed a claim on behalf of the families of the team.[2]
medals were awarded in 16 events contested in 5 sports (9 disciplines). many sources do not list curling and the military patrol, or list them as demonstration events. however, no such designation was made in 1924. in february 2006 the international olympic committee (ioc) ruled that curling was a full part of the olympic program, and have included the medals awarded in the official count.
athletes from 16 nations competed in the first winter olympic games. germany was banned from competing in the games, and instead hosted a series of games called deutsche kampfspiele.
  *   host nation (france)other olympic games celebrated in france
the 1928 winter olympics, officially known as the ii olympic winter games (french: les iies jeux olympiques d'hiver; german: olympische winterspiele 1928; italian: ii giochi olimpici invernali; romansh: gieus olimpics d'enviern 1928), were a winter multi-sport event which was celebrated february 11–19, 1928 in st. moritz, switzerland.
the 1928 games were the first true winter olympics held on its own as they were not in conjunction with a summer olympics. the preceding 1924 games were retroactively renamed the inaugural winter olympics, though they had been in fact part of the 1924 summer olympics. all preceding winter events of the olympic games were the winter sports part of the schedule of the summer games, and not held as a separate winter games. these games also replaced the now redundant nordic games, that were held quadrennially since early in the century.
fluctuating weather conditions made these olympics memorable. the opening ceremony was held in a blizzard.[10] in contrast, warm weather conditions plagued the olympics for the remainder of the games, requiring cancellations of one event with temperatures as high as 25 °c (77 °f). (see further description at the wikipedia main article on winter olympic games.)
medals were awarded in 14 events contested in 4 sports (8 disciplines).
athletes from 25 nations competed at these games, up from 16 in 1924.  nations making their first appearance at the winter olympic games were argentina (first participation of a delegation coming from a country belonging to the southern hemisphere), estonia, germany, japan, lithuania, luxembourg, mexico, the netherlands, and romania.
  *   host nation (switzerland)
the 1932 winter olympics, officially known as the iii olympic winter games, were a winter multi-sport event in the united states, held in lake placid, new york. the games opened on february 4 and closed on february 15. it was the first of four winter olympics held in the united states; lake placid hosted again in 1980.
the games were awarded to lake placid in part by the efforts of godfrey dewey, head of the lake placid club and son of melvil dewey, inventor of the dewey decimal system.[1]  california also had a bid for the 1932 winter games. william may garland, president of the california x olympiad association, wanted the games to take place in wrightwood and big pines, california.  the world's largest ski jump at the time was constructed in big pines for the event,[2] but the games were ultimately awarded to lake placid.
medals were awarded in 14 events contested in 4 sports (7 disciplines).
the games also included events in three demonstration sports.
athletes from 17 nations competed in these games, down from 25 nations at the previous games in 1928.  argentina, estonia, latvia, lithuania, luxembourg, mexico, the netherlands, and yugoslavia did not send athletes to lake placid.
coordinates: 44°17′06″n 73°59′06″w﻿ / ﻿44.285°n 73.985°w﻿ / 44.285; -73.985
the 1936 winter olympics, officially known as the iv olympic winter games (french: les ives jeux olympiques d'hiver) (german: olympische winterspiele 1936), was a winter multi-sport event that was celebrated in 1936 in the market town of garmisch-partenkirchen in bavaria, germany. the country also hosted the 1936 summer olympics, which were held in berlin. it was the last year in which the summer and winter games both took place in the same country (the cancelled olympics of 1940 would have been held in japan, with tokyo hosting the summer games and sapporo hosting the winter games).
the 1936 winter olympics were organized on behalf of the german league of the reich for physical exercise (drl) by karl ritter von halt, who had been named president of the committee for the organization of the fourth winter olympics in garmisch-partenkirchen by reichssportführer hans von tschammer und osten.
medals were awarded in 17 events contested in 4 sports (8 disciplines).
28 nations sent athletes to compete in germany.  australia, bulgaria, greece, liechtenstein, spain, and turkey all made their winter olympic debut in garmisch-partenkirchen, and estonia, latvia, luxembourg, the netherlands, and yugoslavia all returned to the games after having missed the 1932 winter olympics.
  *   host nation (germany)notes
citations

the 1940 winter olympics, which would have been officially known as the v olympic winter games (第五回オリンピック冬季競技大会, dai go-kai orinpikku tōkikyōgi taikai), were to have been celebrated from 3 to 12 february 1940 in sapporo, japan, but the games were eventually cancelled due to the onset of world war ii. sapporo subsequently hosted the 1972 winter olympics.
sapporo was selected to be the host of the sixth edition[citation needed] of the winter olympics, scheduled 3–12 february 1940, but japan gave the games back to the ioc in july 1938, after the outbreak of the second sino-japanese war in 1937.[citation needed] 
the ioc then decided to give the winter olympics to st moritz, switzerland, which had hosted it in 1928. however, the swiss organizers believed that ski instructors should be considered professionals.[citation needed] the ioc was not of that mind, and the games were withdrawn again.[citation needed]
in the spring of 1939, the ioc gave the 1940 winter olympics, now scheduled for 2–11 february, to garmisch-partenkirchen, germany, where the previous games had been held. five months later, on 1 september, germany invaded poland, igniting world war ii, and the winter games were cancelled in november. likewise, the 1944 games, awarded in 1939 to cortina d'ampezzo, italy, were cancelled in 1941.[citation needed] st moritz held the first post-war games in 1948, while cortina d'ampezzo hosted in 1956.[citation needed]
germany has not hosted the winter olympics since 1936: on 6 july 2011; munich lost to pyeongchang, south korea to host the 2018 winter games.
the 1944 winter olympics, which would have been officially known as the v olympic winter games (after the cancellation of 1940's v olympic winter games) (italian: v giochi olimpici invernali), were to have been celebrated in february 1944 in cortina d'ampezzo, italy. cortina d'ampezzo had been awarded the games in june 1939, but with the onset of world war ii, the 1944 winter olympics were cancelled in 1941.
the v olympic winter games eventually took place in st. moritz, switzerland, in 1948; cortina d'ampezzo eventually hosted the 1956 winter olympics and will co-host the 2026 winter olympics with milan. 

the 1948 winter olympics, officially known as the v olympic winter games (french: les ves jeux olympiques d'hiver; german: olympische winterspiele 1948; italian: v giochi olimpici invernali; romansh: gieus olimpics d'enviern 1948), was a winter multi-sport event celebrated in 1948 in st. moritz, switzerland.
the games were the first to be celebrated after world war ii; it had been 12 years since the last winter games in 1936.  from the selection of a host city in a neutral country to the exclusion of japan and germany, the political atmosphere of the post-war world was inescapable during the games.  the organizing committee faced several challenges due to the lack of financial and human resources consumed by the war. these were the first of two winter olympic games under the ioc presidency of sigfrid edström.
there were 28 nations that marched in the opening ceremonies on january 30, 1948. bibi torriani played for the switzerland men's national ice hockey team, and became the first ice hockey player to recite the olympic oath on behalf of all athletes.[1]  nearly 670 athletes competed in 22 events in four sports.  the games also featured two demonstration sports: military patrol, which later became the biathlon, and winter pentathlon, which was discontinued after these games.  notable performances were turned in by figure skaters dick button and barbara ann scott and skier henri oreiller.  most of the athletic venues were already in existence from the first time st. moritz hosted the winter games in 1928.  all of the venues were outdoors, which meant the games were heavily dependent on favorable weather conditions.
the ioc selected st. moritz to host the 1948 games at the 39th general session in lausanne, switzerland, in september 1946.[2] the selection process consisted of two bids, and saw st. moritz be selected ahead of lake placid, united states. st. moritz was selected because it was located in switzerland, which had remained neutral during the war, and also because it had already hosted a winter games in 1928.  this made the organization of the games simpler and more economical.  despite the existence of many of the venues, it was still a difficult task to organize a winter olympic games in less than 18 months.[3]
the comite olympique (co) was composed of local dignitaries and members of the swiss national olympic committee (cos).[4]  they decided to separate into several sub-committees responsible for various aspects of the games.  these committees included housing and maintenance, venue construction, finances, and media and advertising.[5]  the local committees worked very closely with the swiss federal government and the ioc to ensure that the organization of the games proceeded without hindrance.[6]  since no athletes' village existed from the previous games, the athletes and officials were housed in hotels around the city.[4]  it was very important for the committees to draw upon their experiences from the 1928 olympics.  their selection of locations for the various events was contingent on the weather conditions as all the events were held outdoors.[7]
over 800 people were involved in reporting the news of the games to the world.[4]  nearly 500 press credentials were issued by the press commission for the games.  television would not make its olympic debut until 1956.  the coverage of the 1948 games was split between newspapers and radio broadcasts.[8]  the organizing committee had to provide technology, such as long distance telephone lines and telegraph services, to assist the press in communicating with their constituents.[9]
over 2,200 people were needed to provide all the services for the press, officials and athletes at the games.  these services included sanitation, security, and care of the venues.[9]  accommodating the influx of people into st. moritz was a difficult task for the organizing committee.  it was complicated by the mountainous region in which the community was situated.  a massive project to improve the village's transportation infrastructure had to be completed prior to the games.  this included building and widening roads for vehicular traffic.  several train stations were built to accommodate the increased demands for public transit.  they also had to increase the capacity of the city's sewers.  all of the projects had to be approved by the swiss government, and justified by its impact on the success of the games.[9]  to aid the organizing committee the ioc demanded that all participating nations provide lists of their athletes several months prior to the games.  consequently, the swiss knew exactly how many athletes and officials to plan for.[9]
since these games were the first since world war ii they were given the name "the games of renewal."[10]  japan and germany were not invited to these games because they were still ostracized by the international community for their role in world war ii.[11]  their absence was short-lived though, as they returned to olympic competition in 1952.[12]  the soviet union did not send athletes to the st. moritz games of 1948, but they did send ten delegates as observers of the games to determine how successful the soviet athletes would have been had they competed.[12][13]
sapporo, japan had been the choice for the 1940 winter games.[14]  in 1938, the japanese decided to decline the invitation to host the games claiming that preparations for the olympic games were draining the country's resources.[14]  the ioc turned to the host of the 1936 games, garmisch-partenkirchen, which would make it the only city to host consecutive games.[14]  this became impractical when germany invaded poland on september 1, 1939; subsequently germany withdrew its bid to host the games.  finland believed it could host the games and extended an invitation to the ioc, but the soviet union's invasion of finland ended all hope of an olympic games in 1940.[14]  the 1944 winter olympics had been awarded to cortina d'ampezzo, italy in 1939.  as the war continued, this proved to be impractical and the second consecutive olympiad passed without a celebration of the games.  the ioc was presented with two possible host cities for the first post-war games: lake placid, united states and st. moritz, switzerland.  the ioc decided to award the games to switzerland, a neutral country, immediately following world war ii, in order to avoid political posturing on the part of former combatants.[12]
the impact of world war ii was still being felt in 1948. the lack of financial resources and human energy made the organization of the games challenging.[15]  athletes were also affected by a lack of resources.  many competitors arrived with little or no equipment.  in one notable case, norwegian skiers had to borrow skis from the american team in order to compete.[15][16]
medals were awarded in 22 events contested in 4 sports (9 disciplines).[17]
there were also two demonstration sports, military patrol and the winter pentathlon.
two sliding sports were contested at the 1948 winter games, the first was bobsled.  a controversy erupted when it was alleged that the sleds of the united states team had been sabotaged.  it was discovered that the steering wheels had been damaged.[18]  after news broke of the apparent improprieties a truck driver stepped forward and admitted to having accidentally backed into the shed housing the bobsleds.[19]  the accident however did not hinder the united states teams who won a bronze in the two-man event and a gold and a bronze in the four-man event.[20]  the swiss two-man teams placed first and second, which is the best possible results for the event since only two teams were allowed to enter.[20]  the driver of the first place team, felix endrich, beat his coach, the driver of the second place team, fritz feierabend.[18]
the ice hockey tournament was won by canada, with czechoslovakia second and switzerland third.[21] this was the fifth olympic gold medal for canada in hockey.  the only team to beat canada since hockey was introduced at the 1920 summer olympics was great britain at the 1936 winter olympics.[22]  the tournament was almost cancelled when rival teams representing the united states arrived. an amateur athletic union (aau) team was supported by the united states olympic committee (usoc), and an amateur hockey association (aha) team was supported by the ligue internationale de hockey sur glace (lihg).[15]  the international olympic committee ruled that neither team could compete, but the swiss organizing committee allowed the aau team to march in the opening ceremony, and the aha team to play unofficially, without being eligible for medals.[23]
barbara ann scott became the first and only canadian woman to win an olympic gold medal in figure skating, when she won the competition at st. moritz.  despite the distraction caused by a low-flying airplane during her compulsory routine, she was able to muster the focus to place first entering the free skate.  the ice had been shredded the night before the free skate by two ice hockey games (the ice resurfacer had not yet been invented); nonetheless she was able to adjust her routine to avoid the potholes and emerge victorious.[24]
eighteen-year-old american dick button completed the unprecedented north american sweep of the figure skating gold medals.  he led the field after the compulsory skate and then won the gold medal by becoming the first person to ever complete a double axel in competition. later in the 1952 olympics, dick button would win gold a second time.[25]  his victory came at the expense of swiss world champion hans gerschwiler who fell during the free skate.[26]  despite the mishap gershwiler would win the silver medal.[27]
the speed skating competition was held on the same rink that had hosted the events in 1928.  at 1,856 m (6,089 ft) above sea level, the speed skating competition was held at the second highest altitude in olympic history, only squaw valley in 1960 was higher.[28]  the competition was dominated by the scandinavian countries of norway and sweden who won nine out of the twelve possible medals.  scandinavians had done poor in speed skating events up until the 1948 games.  the reason for their success was that speed skating in europe had come to a stand still during world war ii.  only countries that were ancillary to the conflict had the resources to keep their speed skating programs intact.[28]  the 500 meter race was won by finn helgesen of norway.  there was a three-way tie for second place between norwegian thomas byberg and americans robert fitzgerald and kenneth bartholomew.  all three had finished in exactly 43.2 seconds.[20] swede åke seyffarth won a gold medal in the 10,000 meter race and a silver medal in the 1,500 meter race.[20]  the 5,000 meter event was affected by weather.  the twenty racers encountered both wind, sun, and snow in the course of the day's competition.  finally long-distance specialist reidar liaklev from norway prevailed.[29]
alpine skiing made its olympic debut at these games.[10]  a few events had been held at the 1936 games but the st. moritz games featured a full slate of three men's and three women's alpine events.[10] frenchman henri oreiller won a medal in all three alpine events; gold in the downhill and combined, and bronze in the slalom.[20]  he was one of only two athletes to win two gold medals at the 1948 games,[30] and he was also the only athlete to win three or more medals.[20]
austria dominated the women's alpine events, winning five out of a possible nine medals.  trude beiser was a double-medal winner, earning gold in the combined event and silver in the downhill.  she was not the only female skier to win two medals though, united states skier gretchen fraser won gold in the slalom and took silver behind beiser in the combined.[20]  austrian erika mahringer earned two medals by winning bronze medals in both the slalom and the combined.[20]
in cross-country skiing a total of 106 skiers from 15 nations competed in three events.  the events were the 50 kilometer race, the 18 kilometer race and the 4 x 10 kilometer relay.[31]  there were no women's events at the 1948 games.[32] martin lundström of sweden was the other athlete to win two gold medals when he won the 18 kilometer race and participated on the winning cross-country relay team.  overall sweden won seven out of a possible fifteen medals in the nordic events, including all three gold medals and a sweep of the 18 kilometer race.  all fifteen medals were won by either sweden, norway, or finland.[20]
skeleton made its second appearance at the olympics during these games.  it debuted at the 1928 winter olympics also held in st. moritz.  skeleton was a form of luge, which had originally appeared in the st. moritz region at the end of the 19th century.[10]  american john heaton won his second olympic medal in the skeleton, he won his first 20 years earlier when he was 19 years old.[25] italian slider nino bibbia won the gold medal.  it was the first of his 231 career wins on the cresta boblsed track.  one of the curves at cesana pariol, where the bobsled, luge, and skeleton events took place at the 2006 winter olympics in turin, was named after bibbia.[33]
the nordic combined event had been contested at each winter olympics since 1924. nordic combined required athletes to first compete in the open 18 kilometer cross-country ski race alongside the other cross-country competitors.  their times would be assigned a point value.  two days later the athletes would take two jumps off the ski jump hill.  the jumps would be given a point value and the longest jump would be combined with their cross-country time to create a score.[34]  traditional nordic combined power norway was stunned at the 1948 games when finland's heikki hasu became the first non-norwegian to win the event.  in fact norway did not even make the podium.  hasu's teammate martti huhtala took the silver and sven israelsson from sweden won the bronze.[35]
the norwegians swept the ski jumping event.    birger ruud had won the gold medal in the ski jumping event at both the 1932 and 1936 winter games.  the twelve-year hiatus due to world war ii meant that ruud was 36 years old in 1948.  he had retired from competition and was coaching the norwegian team.  however, when he arrived at the games he decided to come out of retirement and compete one last time.  despite not having competed for several years he earned a silver medal.[36][37]  norwegian petter hugsted won the gold and teammate thorleif schjelderup won the bronze.[38]
two demonstration sports were held at the 1948 games.  military patrol had been a demonstration sport at the 1924, 1928, and 1936 winter olympic games.  it entailed a combination of cross-country skiing and shooting at targets.  eventually the competition would be renamed biathlon and was made an official olympic medal sport at the 1960 games in squaw valley, united states.[39]  winter pentathlon involved five competitions: 10 kilometer cross-country ski race, shooting, downhill skiing, fencing and horseback riding.[40]  this was the first and last time the event was held.  fourteen competitors took part in the event.[19]
the opening ceremonies were held at 10:00 am on january 30 along with the initial hockey games and the first two runs of the two-man bobsled.  the closing ceremonies were held at 4:00 pm on february 8.  all of the medals were awarded at the closing ceremonies rather than immediately after the event as current tradition dictates.[41]
the stad olympique (olympic stadium) hosted the opening and closing ceremonies.  the stadium was also used for speed skating, the figure skating competition and the medal games for ice hockey.[42]  most of the ice hockey games were held at the suvretta and kulm stadiums in st. moritz.[42]  bobsled was held at the st. moritz-celerina olympic bobrun. skeleton was contested on the cresta run track.  olympia bob run was built in 1897 and modernized for the 1948 games while the cresta run was first constructed in 1885.[43]  the ski jump competitions were held at olympiaschanze ski jump hill in st. moritz.  it was built in 1927 for the 1928 games, and remained in use until 2006.[44]  the alpine events were held on ski-runs in and around piz nair.[45]
28 nations competed in st. moritz, the same number as the previous winter games in 1936.[46] chile, denmark, iceland, korea, and lebanon all made their winter olympic debut at these games.[12] germany and japan were not invited because of their involvement in world war ii. italy, despite being an axis power originally, was allowed to send athletes after their defection to the allies in 1943. estonia, latvia and lithuania had been annexed by the soviet union in 1940, and would not compete again as independent nations until 1992.  argentina returned to the winter games after missing the 1932 and 1936 games, and australia and luxembourg did not compete in 1948, even though they had participated in 1936.
these are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1948 winter games.[47]
  *   host nation (switzerland)the 1952 winter olympics (norwegian: vinter-ol 1952), officially known as the vi olympic winter games (french: les vies jeux olympiques d'hiver), took place in oslo, norway, from 14 to 25 february 1952. 
discussions about oslo hosting the winter olympic games began as early as 1935; the city wanted to host the 1948 games, but world war ii made that impossible. instead, oslo won the right to host the 1952 games in a contest that included cortina d'ampezzo in italy and lake placid in the united states. all of the venues were in oslo's metropolitan area except for the alpine skiing events, which were held at norefjell, 113 km (70 mi) from the capital. a new hotel was built for the press and dignitaries, along with three dormitories to house athletes and coaches, creating the first modern athlete's village. the city of oslo bore the financial burden of hosting the games in return for the revenue they generated.
the games attracted 694 athletes representing 30 countries, who participated in four sports and 22 events.[1] japan and germany made their returns to winter olympic competition, after being forced to miss the 1948 games in the aftermath of world war ii. germany was represented solely by west german athletes because east germany declined to compete as a unified team. portugal and new zealand made their winter olympic debuts, and for the first time women were allowed to compete in cross-country skiing.
norwegian truck driver hjalmar andersen won three out of four speed skating events to become the most decorated athlete at the games. germany resumed its former prominence in bobsleigh, with wins in the four- and two-man events. dick button of the united states performed the first triple jump in international competition to claim his second consecutive men's figure skating olympic title. the 1952 games featured one demonstration sport, bandy, but only three nordic countries competed in the tournament. norway dominated the overall medal count with 16 medals, seven of them gold. the games closed with the presentation of a flag that would be passed from one winter olympics host city to the next. the flag, which became known as the "oslo flag", has been displayed in the host city during each subsequent winter games.
oslo had unsuccessfully bid to host the 1936 winter olympics, losing to germany, which had hosted the 1936 summer olympics. at that time, the nation that hosted the summer olympics also hosted the winter olympics.[2] after the 1936 games, the international olympic committee (ioc) decided to award the winter and summer games to different countries, but the games were suspended during world war ii. london hosted the first post-war games, the 1948 summer olympics, and recommended oslo as the host city for the 1948 winter games, but the city council declined.[2] instead, the 1948 winter olympics were held in st. moritz, switzerland.[3]
norwegians were undecided about hosting a winter olympics.[4] culturally, they were opposed to competitive winter sports, particularly skiing events, despite the success of norwegian athletes at previous winter games.[5]  but the organizers believed the 1952 games could be an opportunity to promote national unity and to show the world that norway had recovered from the war.[6]  vying with oslo for the right to host the games were cortina d'ampezzo, italy, and lake placid, united states.[2]  the ioc voted to award the 1952 winter games to oslo on 21 june 1947 at the 40th ioc session in stockholm, sweden.[7]  later, cortina d'ampezzo was awarded the 1956 games, and lake placid—which had hosted the 1932 winter olympics—was chosen to host the 1980 winter games. norway became the first scandinavian country to host a winter olympics,[2] and the 1952 winter games were the first to be held in a nation's capital.[1]
a special committee was assigned to organize the 1952 games, which consisted of four norwegian sports officials and four representatives from the municipality of oslo, including mayor brynjulf bull.[7]  the committee was in place by december 1947.[9]  the city of oslo funded the games entirely, in exchange for keeping all the revenue generated.[10]  to accommodate the influx of athletes and coaches, quarters for competitors and support staff were designed and constructed, with three new facilities (forerunners of the athlete's villages of later games) built.[11]  the city of oslo paid to have a new hotel constructed, the viking, used for ioc delegates, out-of-town dignitaries, and as the communication hub of the games.[12][13] for the first time in a winter games, an indoor ice hockey arena was constructed, which hosted the eight-team tournament.[14][15]  oslo's existing central arena, bislett stadium, was used for the opening and closing ceremonies, and for speed skating events. improvements to the arena included better sound and lighting systems, remodeled club house and press rooms, and the addition of a medical center.[16]
in the aftermath of the german occupation of norway during world war ii, anti-german sentiment began to affect preparations for the 1952 olympics.[17]  discussions were held to consider whether germany should be allowed to participate in the games.[18]  when in 1950, the west german olympic committee requested recognition by the ioc, it raised the question of whether their participation would cause political boycotts in the upcoming games.[19] once the ioc recognized the west german olympic committee, west germany was then formally invited to compete at the 1952 winter games.[20]  east germany was invited to participate with west germany, as a unified team, but they declined.[21]
at first norway was reluctant to welcome german athletes and others considered nazi sympathizers. for example, norwegian speed skater finn hodt was not allowed to compete in the norwegian speed skating team because he collaborated with the nazis during the war. eventually, despite the concern, norway agreed to allow german and japanese athletes to compete.[18]  the soviet union sent no athletes to oslo, despite being recognized by the ioc. they had intended to enter a team in the ice hockey tournament, but applied too late to join the international ice hockey federation.[22][23]
medals were awarded in 22 events contested in four sports (eight disciplines).
the opening ceremonies were held in bislett stadium on 15 february.[14]  king george vi of great britain had died on 6 february 1952 with his daughter elizabeth ii took the throne as queen, eight days before the start of the games.[24]  as a result, all national flags were flown at half-mast, and princess ragnhild opened the games in place of her grandfather, king haakon vii, who was in london attending the funeral.[25]  this was the first time an olympic games had been declared open by a female official.[1] the parade of nations was held according to tradition, with greece first, the rest of the nations proceeding by norwegian alphabetical order, with the host nation last.[26]  the british, australian, canadian and new zealand teams all wore black arm bands at the opening ceremonies in memory of their monarch.[27]  after the parade of nations the olympic flame was lit.[14]  on 13 february, at the start of the inaugural winter olympics torch relay, the torch was lit in the hearth of the morgedal house, birthplace of skiing pioneer sondre norheim.[1]  the torch relay lasted two days and took place entirely on skis.[1][26]  at the opening ceremonies the final torch bearer, eigil nansen, received the olympic torch and skied to a flight of stairs where he removed his skis, ascended, and ignited the flame.[28]
the bobsleigh and alpine skiing events were held the day before the opening ceremonies.[29]  competitors in these events were unable to attend the festivities in oslo; consequently simple opening ceremonies were held at frognerseteren, site of the bobsleigh events, and norefjell, site of the alpine skiing events.[30]
after a 16-year hiatus from the olympics germany made a triumphant return to the bobsleigh competition, winning the two- and four-man events.[31]  the results for both bobsleigh events were the same, with the united states and switzerland taking silver and bronze respectively.[31] fritz feierabend from switzerland competed in both the two- and four-man competitions. his two bronze medals were the fourth and fifth in an olympic career that spanned 16 years and three olympics.[32]  there were no weight restrictions on the bobsleigh athletes, and the average weight for each member of the winning german four-man team was 117 kg (258 lb), which was more than the olympic heavyweight boxing champion in 1952.[31]  seeing the undue advantage overweight athletes brought to their teams, the international federation for bobsleigh and toboganning instituted a weight limit for future olympics.[33]
all of the speed skating events were held at bislett stadium.[34]  americans ken henry and don mcdermott placed first and second in the 500-meter race, but norwegian truck driver hjalmar andersen electrified the partisan crowd by winning the 1,500, 5,000 and 10,000-meter events;[34][35] his margins of victory were the largest in olympic history.[1] dutchman wim van der voort placed second in the 1,500 meters and his countryman kees broekman placed second to andersen in the 5,000 and 10,000-meter races, becoming the first olympic speed skating medalists from the netherlands.[34]  absent from the competition was former world champion kornél pajor. the hungarian-born speed skater had won both long distance races at the world championships held in oslo in 1949 and then defected to sweden,[34] but was unable to obtain swedish citizenship in time to compete in 1952.[34]
there were three alpine skiing events on the olympic program: the slalom, giant slalom and downhill. both men and women competed in all three events, held at norefjell and rødkleiva.[36]  the giant slalom made its olympic debut at the 1952 games.[37]  austrian skiers dominated the competition, winning seven out of a possible 18 medals, including othmar schneider who won gold and silver in the men's slalom and downhill. norwegian stein eriksen won gold in the men's giant slalom and silver in the slalom.[36] greek slalom skier antoin miliordos fell 18 times on his run and crossed the finish line backwards.[38][39][40] american skier andrea mead lawrence was the only double gold medalist, winning the giant slalom and the slalom. she was the first skier from the united states to win two alpine skiing gold medals.[41]
all the cross-country events were held next to the ski jump hill at holmenkollbakken. as had been the case in 1948 there were three men's events: 18 kilometers, 50 kilometers, and a relay.[42]  added to the olympic program for the first time was a ten-kilometer race for women.[43]  all the cross-country medals were won by nordic countries, and finnish skiers won eight of the twelve possible.[42] lydia wideman of finland became the first female olympic champion in cross-country skiing; her teammates mirja hietamies and siiri rantanen won silver and bronze respectively. veikko hakulinen won the 50-kilometer men's race to begin an olympic career that would culminate in seven medals, three of them gold.[43] hallgeir brenden won the 18-kilometer race and helped norway take the silver in the 4 × 10-kilometer relay. brenden went on to win another gold in the men's 15-kilometer race in 1956, and a silver in the relay in 1960.[44]
the nordic combined event was held at the cross-country and ski jump venues. for the first time, the ski jump part took place first with competitors taking three jumps from the holmenkollbakken. the 18-km cross country skiing event took place the next day. results were tallied by the best two marks were scored, along with the results of the cross-country race, to determine a winner.[45]  norwegians simon slåttvik and sverre stenersen won the gold and bronze respectively.[46]  stenersen went on to win the gold at the 1956 games in the same event.[47] heikki hasu from finland won the silver, preventing a norwegian sweep of the medals.[46]
crowds in excess of 100,000 greeted the ski jumpers as they competed at holmenkollbakken.[48]  in 1952 there was only one event, the men's normal hill, which was held on 24 february.[49]  the king, prince harald, and princess ragnhild were in attendance.[48]  the norwegian athletes did not disappoint the crowd, as arnfinn bergmann and torbjørn falkanger placed first and second; swedish jumper karl holmström took the bronze.[50]  norwegian athletes won the ski jumping gold medal in every winter olympics from 1924 to 1952.[51]
there were three events in the olympic figure skating competition: men's singles, women's singles and mixed pairs. the events were held at bislett stadium on a rink constructed inside the speed skating track.[52][52]
dick button of the united states won the men's singles event. helmut seibt of austria took silver and james grogan of the united states won bronze.[53] button became the first figure-skater to land a triple jump in competition when he performed the triple loop in the men's free skate.[54][55]  british skater jeannette altwegg won the gold medal in the women's singles, the silver was awarded to american tenley albright, who went on to win gold at the 1956 winter games in cortina d'ampezzo,[56] and jacqueline du bief of france won the bronze.[57]  the german husband and wife pair of ria and paul falk won the mixed pairs competition.[58]  they defeated americans karol and peter kennedy, who placed second,[59]  and hungarian siblings marianna and lászló nagy, who won the bronze medal.[60]
a majority of the ice hockey matches took place at jordal amfi, a new hockey stadium built for the olympics.[61]  nine teams played in the tournament and canada again won the gold medal.[62]  canada had won all but one olympic hockey tournament thus far, but in 1956 the soviet team began to compete and ended canadian dominance.[63] canada was represented by the edmonton mercurys, an amateur hockey team sponsored by the owner of a mercury automobile dealership.[63] canada played the united states to a three all tie on the final day to clinch the gold, and the americans won silver. norwegian newspaper dagbladet criticized the result, calling the game "fixed in advance".[64] the official report of the usoc for the 1952 olympics covers the game from a different perspective. accroding to the report, by the end of the game against canada, the americans were mentally and physically exhausted and after scoring the third goal and tying the game they decided to focus on defense in order not to lose silver. it is important to note that canadians at the time were considered unbeatable and even tying that team was almost impossible.[65] sweden and czechoslovakia ended up tied for third (czechoslovakia defeated the swedes in the head-to-head game, but according to the rules at the time they had to play a tiebreaker game because they were tied in points). sweden won that game and avenged the loss in the round-robin.[62]  the czechs believed they had already won the bronze when they defeated the swedes in the round-robin, calling the decision to play a tie-breaking game a "plot of the capitalist countries".[64]  canadian team was criticized for its rough play; although body checking was legal, it was not often used by european teams, and opponents and spectators alike took a dim view of that style of play.[15][62]
the ioc lobbied the organizing committee to host either military patrol or curling as a demonstration sport.[23]  the committee instead selected bandy, which had never been included in the winter games.[66] bandy, which is popular in nordic countries, is played by teams of eleven on an outdoor soccer field-sized ice rink, using a small ball and sticks about 1.2 m (3.9 ft) long.[67]  as it was a demonstration sport, the players were ineligible for medals. three nations participated: finland, norway and sweden.[68]  each of the three teams won one game and lost one game; with sweden winning the competition based on number of goals scored, followed by norway in second place, and finland in third place. two of the games were played at dæhlenenga stadium and one at bislett stadium.[69]
at the 1952 winter games the closing ceremonies were a distinct program listing, unlike previous winter games when the closing ceremonies were held directly after the final event. the closing ceremonies were held in bislett stadium, on monday evening, 25 february.[70]  the flag bearers entered the stadium in the same order they followed for the opening ceremonies. that evening four medal ceremonies were also held for the women's cross-country race, the men's cross-country relay, the ski jumping competition, and the ice hockey tournament.[70]
since 1920, the "antwerp flag" has been passed from host city to host city during closing ceremonies for the summer games.[71]  the city of oslo gave an olympic flag to establish the same tradition for the winter games. brynjulf bull, oslo's mayor, passed the flag to the president of the ioc, sigfrid edström, who declared the flag was to pass from host city to host city for future winter games. the flag, which came to be known as the "oslo flag", has since been preserved in a display case, with the name of every winter olympics host city engraved on brass plaques, and is brought to each winter games to be displayed. a replica is used during the closing ceremonies.[72]
after the flag ceremony the olympic flame was extinguished, a special speed skating race was held, and the figure skating competitors gave an exhibition, followed by 40 children dressed in national costumes performing an ice dance.[73]  for a finale, to the close the games, the lights were extinguished and a 20-minute fireworks display lit up the night sky.[73]
with a seating capacity of 29,000, bislett stadium became the centrepiece of the games. it was the venue for the speed skating events and the figure skating competition. bislett was large enough for a 400 m (1,300 ft) speed skating track, and a figure skating ice-rink of 30 by 60 m (98 by 197 ft); a snow bank separated the track and the rink.[74] because bislett was an outdoor arena, the organizing committee chose tryvann stadion and hamar stadion as secondary alternative skating venues to be used the case of bad weather.[75] in 1994 hamar became the venue for the speed skating events at the 1994 winter olympics in lillehammer.[1]
the oslo winter games were the first to feature an olympic ice hockey tournament held on artificial ice.[14]  a new stadium was built for the hockey tournament in a residential area of eastern oslo, called jordal amfi, which accommodated 10,000 spectators in stands rising steeply from the rink.[76]  23 of the 36 hockey matches were played at jordal amfi, with the remaining matches played at kadettangen, dælenenga idrettspark, lillestrøm stadion and marienlyst stadion.[75]
the cross-country races and ski-jump competition were held at holmenkollbakken, located roughly 8 km (5 mi) from the center of oslo.[77] the expected number of spectators caused concerns about traffic, so a new road was constructed and the existing thoroughfare widened.[78]  holmenkollbakken was built in 1892 and improvements were needed to meet international standards. the original wood ski-jump was replaced with a concrete tower and jump that was 87 m (285 ft) long.[77] new stands were built to seat 13,000 people, and an area was added at the base of the hill to accommodate 130,000 spectators.[79]
the hills and terrain in the surrounding area met the competitive demands for an elite cross-country ski event. a notice board was posted at the start and finish lines to help spectators monitor the progress of the competitors.[80]  the cross-country and nordic combined races began and ended at the base of the ski jump hill. the stands for the ski jump competition had to be removed during the cross-country races; spectators had only a small area from which to watch the races but were allowed on the course to cheer on the competitors.[78]
the alpine skiing events were split between norefjell and rødkleiva. the slalom courses were at rødkleiva, located on the same mountain as holmenkollen and frognerseteren. the course had an elevation difference, from start to finish, of  200 m (660 ft) and was 480 m (1,570 ft) in length.[81]  a rope tow had to be built to bring the skiers from the bottom to the top of the hill. the downhill race and the giant slalom—which made its olympic debut in 1952—were held at norefjell, which was 113 km (70 mi) from oslo and the only venue located away from the capital city.[13]  work had to be done to make the area suitable for olympic competition. a bridge across lake krøderen was built to help alleviate transportation congestion. a new hotel, two ski lifts, and a new road were also constructed.[81]
there was no permanent bobsleigh run in norway.[82]  instead the organizers built a temporary course out of snow and ice.[18] this is often wrongly assumed to have been built at korketrekkeren.[83] from frognerseteren a separate 1,508 m (4,948 ft) long, 13-turn course was designed and built.[84] the bobsleigh run was first constructed and tested in 1951, then rebuilt for the games in 1952.[18] a car was used to return the bobsleighs to the start of the track.[85]
thirty nations sent competitors, which was the highest number of participants at a winter games.[14] new zealand and portugal took part in the winter olympic games for the first time. australia, germany, and japan returned after a 16-year absence. south korea, liechtenstein, and turkey competed in 1948 but did not participate in the 1952 games.
the official opening ceremonies were held on 15 february, although two smaller ceremonies were held on 14 february to conform with competition schedules.[86] from 15 february until 25 february, the day of the closing ceremonies, at least one event final was held each day.[87]

these are the nations that topped the medal count at the 1952 winter games.[14]
  *   host nation (norway)notes
citations


the 1956 winter olympics, officially known as the vii olympic winter games (french: les viies jeux olympiques d'hiver; italian: vii giochi olimpici invernali), was a multi-sport event held in cortina d'ampezzo, italy, from 26 january to 5 february 1956.
cortina, which had originally been awarded the 1944 winter olympics, beat out montreal, colorado springs and lake placid for the right to host the 1956 games. the cortina games were unique in that many of the venues were within walking distance of each other. the organising committee received financial support from the italian government for infrastructure improvements, but the rest of the costs for the games had to be privately financed. consequently, the organising committee was the first to rely heavily on corporate sponsorship for funding.[1]
thirty-two nations—the largest number of countries participating in the winter olympics until then—competed in the four sports and twenty-four events. austrian toni sailer became the first person to sweep all three alpine skiing events in a single olympics. the figure skating competition was held outdoors for the last time at these games. logistically, the only problem encountered was a lack of snow at the alpine skiing events. to remedy this, the italian army transported large amounts of snow to ensure the courses were adequately covered.
politics did not affect the 1956 winter games - unlike the summer games in melbourne, australia later in the year which many nations boycotted after the soviet repression of the hungarian revolution, and the suez war. the cortina olympics were the first winter olympics televised to a multi-national audience.[1] these were the first olympic games under the ioc presidency of avery brundage.
cortina will go on to host the 2026 winter olympics for a second time 70 years later.
cortina d'ampezzo is a ski resort village situated in the dolomite alps in the north-eastern corner of italy.[2] in 1956, it had a population of 6,500 people.[3] count alberto bonacossa, an accomplished alpine skier, figure skater and a member of the international olympic committee (ioc) since 1925, spearheaded the effort to bring the olympic games to cortina d'ampezzo.[4] he persuaded the city council of cortina to bid for the 1944 games. during the 38th ioc congress held in london in 1939, cortina d'ampezzo was awarded the 1944 winter olympics, but the games were canceled due to the outbreak of world war ii.[5]
in 1946 the italian winter sports federation convened in milan and decided to support a new attempt from cortina to host the winter games. a delegation, led by count bonacossa, presented cortina's bid to host the 1952 winter olympics at the 40th ioc session in stockholm, sweden. they were backed by the city's council and the italian national olympic committee (coni, comitato olimpico nazionale italiano). a rival bid from oslo, norway, soundly defeated cortina.[4] count bonacossa's and coni prepared a third bid, this time for the 1956 winter games. the host city selection took place in rome, during the 43rd ioc session. on 28 april 1949, cortina d'ampezzo was selected with 75% of the votes, over bids from montreal, colorado springs and lake placid. unfortunately, bonacossa died on 30 january 1953, three years before he could witness cortina host the games.[6]
a total of 32 nations sent athletes to cortina d'ampezzo.[1] along with the soviet union, bolivia and iran competed at the winter games for the first time, making bolivia the first completely tropical nation to participate in a winter olympic. korea, liechtenstein, and turkey returned after having missed the 1952 winter olympics, while argentina, denmark, new zealand, and portugal did not compete at these games,[8] after having participated in the previous edition. athletes from west germany (frg) and east germany (gdr) competed together as the united team of germany, an arrangement that would continue for the following two olympiads.[9]
below is the list of participating nations, with the number of competitors indicated in brackets:[8]
these are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1956 winter olympics:[10]
* two gold medals were awarded when soviet skaters tied in the 1,500 metre speed skating competition.[10]
the 1956 winter olympics was organised by a committee composed of members of the italian national olympic committee and the italian government.[4]  observers were sent to the oslo games in 1952 to collect information regarding the sports programme, infrastructure, and accommodation requirements.[11]  the intelligence gathered there indicated that cortina's facilities were not up to olympic standards. the town did not have an ice stadium, or a speed skating rink; the alpine ski runs, ski jump and bobsleigh run were in poor condition. cortina was a small village, and its infrastructure would be overwhelmed by the crowds expected for the games. to accommodate the influx of people, new roads and rail lines had to be built, and the city's power grid and telephone lines expanded. enhancements also had to be made to sewer and water capacity.[12]  the italian government supplied italian lira 460 million for infrastructure improvements. the italian olympic committee was responsible for funding the rest of the costs of hosting the games. they did this by setting aside monies from their own budget, ticket sales, and even culling funds from local football betting pools.[13][14]  the organising committee also took the unprecedented step of selling corporate sponsorship.[1]  for example, fiat was designated the official car of the 1956 winter olympics, and olivetti supplied typewriters for the 400 journalists attending the games.[14][15]
the cold war began after the allied victory in world war ii. until 1952, many of the communist countries of eastern europe had participated in worker's olympics or spartakiads. the soviet union emerged from international isolation by eschewing the spartakiad and participating in the 1952 summer olympics in helsinki; they made their winter olympics debut at the cortina games. soviet general secretary nikita khrushchev's aim was to use international sports competitions, such as the olympics, to demonstrate the superiority of communism, strengthen political ties with other communist countries, and project the soviet union as a peace-loving nation actively engaged in the world.[16]  the soviets' participation at the olympics raised the level of competition as they won the most medals and more gold medals than any other nation.[17]  the cortina games were held before the hungarian revolution and subsequent soviet invasion, and the suez war, which occurred in the autumn of 1956; the winter games escaped the boycotts that plagued the melbourne olympics, which were celebrated in november and december of that year.[18]
the cortina games were the first winter olympics to be broadcast to a multi-national audience.[19]  television as a mass communication technology was expanding rapidly in the 1950s. in the midst of the cold war, europe was a propaganda battlefield as countries relayed television signals across the iron curtain.[20]  by 1956, countries in the soviet sphere of influence had achieved a technological advantage and were able to broadcast communist television programmes into finland, the eastern border regions and more isolated geographic areas of west germany and austria, where residents had coverage from an east german broadcast with a pro-communist point-of-view.[21][20] most west germans watched the 1956 winter olympics via eurovision broadcasts which were relayed all over western europe including all major west german stations (eurovision connectivity in 1956 [22][23]) the political ramifications were not the only impact television had these olympics. the cortina games did not generate revenue from television – the 1960 winter olympics in squaw valley were the first to do so[24][25] – but were an experiment in the feasibility of televising a large multi-sport event.[26] for the first time at an olympic games, the venues were built with television in mind. for example, the grand stand at the cross-country ski venue (lo stadio della neve) was built facing south so that the television cameras would not be adversely affected by the rising or setting sun.[13]
medals were awarded in 24 events contested in 4 sports (8 disciplines). the programme for the 1956 winter games saw two new events added to the four sports and twenty-two events from the 1952 olympics, namely the men's 30 kilometre cross-country ski race and the women's 3x5 kilometre cross-country relay race.
the opening ceremonies took place on thursday, 26 january 1956 in the olympic ice stadium. temporary seating was added to boost the stadium's capacity to 14,000 people. athletes representing 32 nations marched in the ceremony and mr giovanni gronchi, president of the italian republic, declared the games open. at this point, speed skater guido caroli skated into the stadium with the olympic flame. while he was on a circuit of the ice stadium he tripped and fell over a television cable; he regained his feet and lit the cauldron.[27]  the olympic oath was delivered by giuliana chenal-minuzzo; this was the first time a female athlete gave the oath at an olympic games.[1]  the olympic hymn, officially recognised as such at the ioc congress in paris on 13 june 1955, was played for the first time at the cortina games.[28]
there were two bobsleigh events, the two-man and four-man competitions. every participating nation was limited to two sleighs in each event. the sleighs made four runs, with the total time summed. the italians won gold and silver in the two-man event. switzerland took third place when they passed spain on the fourth run.[29]  in the four-man event held a week later, the swiss won the gold medal, italy picked up the silver, and the united states won the bronze.[30]  italy had participated in all six previous olympic bobsleigh competitions but had never reached the podium.[31][32]  italians renzo alverà and eugenio monti won the silver in the two-man competition and were also on the silver-winning four-man sleigh.[33] monti's silver medals at the 1956 games were the first of six olympic medals he would win in his bobsleigh career. the bobsleigh run at cortina was eventually renamed the eugenio monti track to honour his bobsleigh career.[34]  the medals won in bobsleigh would be the host nation's only medals at these games.[10]  one complaint of the bobsleigh events was that the track surface suffered extensive damage due to overuse. this hampered the performance of teams drawn late in the competition.[35]
the eighth olympic ice hockey tournament also served as both the european and world championships. split into three pools before the tournament, the ten participating nations began by playing each team in their pool in a round robin format. the top two teams from each pool advanced to the final round, with the remaining teams played in a consolation group for 7th through 10th places. canada, czechoslovakia, and the soviet union took first place in their preliminary pools with undefeated records. germany, the united states, and sweden took second place in their pools.[36]
an important early matchup of the final round was the game between canada and the united states. the canadians had never lost to the us in olympic play prior to that game. in what was considered a tremendous upset, the united states defeated canada 4–1. the americans, who placed fourth at the 1955 world ice hockey championships and were not expected to medal, then faced the ussr, who won the tournament in 1954 and took silver in 1955 behind canada, in a game that would eventually make the difference in the gold medal. the soviets overwhelmed the underdogs and won the match 4–0. the ussr then played canada, who still had a chance to win the gold if they defeated the soviets, and won 2–0 despite being dramatically outshot in the first and second periods. the ussr won gold, the united states surprisingly took silver and canada, with their two losses, earned bronze, their worst result to date in olympic play.[36][37]
the cortina games were the last olympics to feature figure skating outdoors.[1]  skaters from the united states won five medals, sweeping the men's event and taking the top two spots in the ladies' event. tenley albright was the women's olympic champion despite sustaining a serious injury in practice. less than two weeks before the olympics she was practicing her skating routine when she hit a rut in the ice and fell. her skate cut through several layers of clothing, and sliced her right leg at the ankle.[38]  her teammate carol heiss won the silver, and austrian ingrid wendl earned the bronze medal. americans hayes jenkins, ronald robertson, and jenkins' brother david jenkins were the men's medallists. the austrian pair of sissy schwarz and kurt oppelt took the gold medal in the pairs event.[39]  canadians frances dafoe and norris bowden won the silver and the hungarian siblings marianna nagy and lászló nagy defended their bronze medal from the 1952 games.[40][41]
the soviet union dominated the speed skating events by winning seven of the twelve medals, including four golds. soviet skaters set two world records, an olympic record, and had at least one medallist in each of the four events. yevgeny grishin was the top individual performer, with two gold medals and two world records.[42] grishin and soviet teammate yuri mikhaylov tied in the 1,500 metre race. it was decided to award both of the athletes gold medals and leave the silver medal position vacant.[43] sigvard ericsson of sweden earned gold and silver medals and set an olympic record in the 10,000 metre event.[44]
six alpine skiing events were held, three for men and three for women. the races were the downhill, slalom and giant slalom. toni sailer of austria swept the men's gold medals, becoming the first person to win three alpine skiing golds in a single olympics.[1]  led by sailer, the austrians dominated the alpine skiing events for both men and women, winning nine out of a possible eighteen medals.[45]  the austrians were particularly successful in the giant slalom; the men swept the medals and the women took silver and bronze. chiharu igaya won the first winter olympics medal for japan when he placed second in the slalom.[46][47]  swiss teammates, madeleine berthod and renée colliard won the women's downhill and slalom races. germany earned its only gold medal of the games when ossi reichert took first in the giant slalom.[48]
two women's events were added to the cross-country skiing programme for the first time. the soviet women took the top two spots in the individual 10 kilometre race but lost to finland in the new 3x5 kilometre relay. the men had a new event as well, the 30 kilometre race, which was won by veikko hakulinen from finland. the other three men's events were won by three different nations: norway took the 15 kilometre race, sweden the 50 kilometre event, and the soviet union won the relay.[49]  overall the soviet union won seven out of a possible eighteen medals in cross-country skiing. sweden, behind the strong skiing of sixten jernberg, won six medals.[50]  jernberg won a gold, two silvers, and a bronze, which were the first of nine olympic medals he would earn in his cross-country career.[51]
there were significant changes to the nordic combined event at the 1956 games. the event had always been a cross-country race followed by a ski jump. originally the competitors in the nordic combined were entered into the open 18 kilometre cross-country race, which meant that they competed alongside athletes who were dedicated cross-country skiers. their times were combined with their score from two ski jumps to determine the winner.[52]  at the cortina games, the format was altered to allow the nordic combined athletes to compete in a dedicated 15 kilometre cross-country race. two days later they had three jumps on the ski jump hill. their best two scores were combined with their cross-country time to determine a winner. this format would become the standard for nordic combined competitions going forward.[52] norway continued its dominance of nordic combined when sverre stenersen won the gold medal. since its inception at the 1924 games, the country had only lost the nordic combined event once.[53][54] stenersen was followed by bengt eriksson of sweden and poland's franciszek gąsienica groń.[52]
in the ski jumping event, the swiss jumper, andreas däscher introduced a new style of jumping, which would soon come to be known as the däscher technique. before these games, the athletes would hold their arms forward over their heads.[55]  däscher reasoned that if the athlete held his arms at his side he would fly farther. adherents to this new style dominated the competition. finnish jumpers antti hyvärinen and aulis källakorpi took first and second place;[27] harry glass of germany won the bronze medal.[56]  this competition marked the end of norwegian dominance in the sport. since the first winter games in 1924, the norwegians had won the gold medal at each olympics until 1956. the poor performance of the norwegian jumpers was attributed to their refusal to use the new jumping technique.[57]
the closing ceremonies took place on sunday, 5 february in the olympic ice stadium. they were preceded by a figure skating exhibition performed by the men's, women's, and pairs figure skating champions. the flag bearers of each nation then entered the stadium followed by the flags of greece and the united states. these two flags were raised to honor the nation that founded the olympics and the next country to host the winter games. avery brundage, president of the international olympic committee, declared the olympics closed, and a fireworks display concluded the games.[58]
the opening ceremony was held on 26 january, along with the first games of the hockey tournament. from 27 january until 5 february, the day of the closing ceremony, at least one event final was held each day.[59]
† the numeral indicates the number of event finals for each sport held that day.
a unique feature of the cortina olympics was the proximity of many event locations which were in walking distance of each other within the town of cortina. the speed skating events were held at lake misurina, roughly 13 km (8.1 mi) from cortina. the venues featured grandstands heated by silica coils built into the seats. silica coil heating was a technology that had only recently become economical.[60]  the competitions were held without incident except for the skiing events, which suffered from a lack of snow.[12]
a notable venue not found at the 1956 games was an olympic village, where the athletes would be housed. the town of cortina d'ampezzo had a population of less than 7,000 people in 1956. local hotels were concerned that after the olympics an olympic village would so significantly increase the hotel capacity it would put many of them out of business. athletes were billeted by local families or stayed in hotels during the games.[61]
the olympic ice stadium (stadio olimpico del ghiaccio) [62] was intended to be the focal point of the games. it was built on the banks of the boite river just north of cortina. after new roads and a bridge had been constructed, the stadium was an eight-minute walk from the center of town. the stadium was built to accommodate 6,000–7,000 people. due to space limitations the grandstands were constructed vertically, with tiers built directly on top of each other. there were two artificial ice rinks of 30 by 60 m (98 by 197 ft), with a total ice surface of 4,320 m2 (46,500 sq ft). a special cooling plant was built under the stadium, which froze the ice through the evaporation of ammonia. the construction cost totaled itl 1.3 billion (us$2.1 million in 1956), making it the most expensive venue of these games. the stadium was used for the opening and closing ceremonies, all of the figure skating competitions and select ice hockey events. after the games, the organising committee made the ice stadium a gift to the city of cortina. it was used as an ice skating rink in the winter and an outdoor gymnasium for judo and gymnastics in the summer.[63]
the apollonio stadium was used for select games of the ice hockey tournament. considerable work had to be done to bring the stadium up to date. a second rink was added to allow for two games to be held simultaneously. the stadium was outfitted with electric lights and the seating capacity was enlarged to accommodate 2,000 people.[64]
the bobsleigh run (pista olimpica di bob – eugenio monti),[65] was originally constructed in 1928. the track was rebuilt and expanded several times during the years leading up to the olympics. a state-of-the-art signal board was installed displaying a diagram of the run with the position of each sleigh on the run shown with lights.[66]
situated around 2.5 km (2 mi) from cortina, near zuel, the "italia" jump (trampolino olimpico italia) was originally built in 1923 as the "franchetti" jump. after modifications in 1926, the first structure was demolished in 1939 and rebuilt in 1940. with the 1956 games coming to cortina, the jump had to be updated again to comply with the technical demands of the olympics. on april 15, 1955, the "franchetti" jump was finally demolished and the new "italia jump" was completed in the same year at a cost of nearly itl 310 million ($500,000).[67] the reinforced concrete platform was 54 m (177 ft) high, and possessed a 87.5 m (287 ft) long, 35° steep in-run. two grandstands, each with a capacity for 3,000 people, were placed on either side of the landing slope; a natural amphiteatre at the bottom of the hill could hold up to 40,000 standing spectators. a special road was built between cortina and the venue for the transport of athletes, officials and authorities.[68]
the snow stadium (stadio della neve) was constructed 2 km (1.2 mi) from cortina, and hosted all of the cross-country events. two grandstands were constructed to accommodate 6,000 people. three types of cross-country courses were constructed: one of 15 km (9 mi), three of 5 km (3 mi), and four of 10 km (6 mi). some of these courses went through the bobsleigh run. as a result, a bridge had to be constructed so events occurring in the two venues would not interfere with each other.[69]
the alpine runs (le piste alpine) were built on the slopes of monte tofana and monte faloria in the nearby dolomite alps. the men's and women's downhill and slalom races were held on tofana. faloria was the site of the two giant slalom events. it took nearly two years to complete construction of the runs. in previous years, lack of snow was never an issue, but in the winter of 1956 there was insufficient snowfall for skiers to safely navigate the runs. as a consequence, snow had to be transported from other parts of the mountains by the italian army.[70]
the misurina rink (la pista di misurina) was the location of the speed skating events. this was the last time that speed skating at the olympics was held on natural ice. it was 13 km (8.1 mi) from cortina. the rink was established at the northern end of the lake with a mountain backdrop. stands were constructed to accommodate 8,500 people. despite the event being held outdoors on lake ice, two world records and two olympic records were broken during the competition.[71]
three of the venues for these games (the bobsleigh run, indoor arena, and ski jump) would serve as film location for the 1981 james bond film for your eyes only.[72]


the 1960 winter olympics, officially known as the viii olympic winter games, was a winter multi-sport event held between february 18–28, 1960 in squaw valley, california, united states.
squaw valley was chosen to host the games at the 1956 meeting of the international olympic committee (ioc). it was an undeveloped resort in 1955, so from 1956 to 1960 the infrastructure and all of the venues were built at a cost of us$80,000,000. it was designed to be intimate, allowing spectators and competitors to walk to nearly all the venues. squaw valley hosted athletes from thirty nations who competed in four sports and twenty-seven events. women's speed skating and biathlon made their olympic debuts. the organizers decided the bobsled events did not warrant the cost to build a venue, so for the first and only time bobsled was not on the winter olympic program.
cold war politics forced the ioc to debate the participation of china and taiwan. the united states supported taiwan while the soviet union stood behind china. given the fact that the 1960 games were to be held in america, there was concern among ioc members that the united states would not allow china or any other communist country to participate.[1] in 1957, ioc president avery brundage, himself an american, announced that if the united states refused entry to any country recognized by the ioc, then they would revoke squaw valley's invitation to host the games and he would resign the presidency.[2] bowing to international pressure, the united states allowed athletes from communist countries to participate. china continued to demand that taiwan be expelled from the ioc, demands that were refused until china broke off relations ending any hope that they would participate in 1960.[3]
squaw valley was a struggling ski resort with minimal facilities, which made its selection to host the 1960 winter olympics a surprise.[4][5]  wayne poulsen and alexander cushing, who were inspired to an olympic bid by a newspaper article mentioning that reno, nevada, and anchorage, alaska, had expressed interest in the games.[4][6] poulsen, president of the squaw valley development company, petitioned california governor goodwin knight to support a bid to host the olympic games. knight's administration agreed and recommended that the california legislature appropriate $1,000,000 to the effort.[7]  based on the financial support received from the state of california, the united states olympic committee (usoc) approved the bid on january 7, 1955. cushing and the usoc received a resolution passed by the united states congress and signed by president dwight eisenhower, calling on the international olympic committee (ioc) to consider squaw valley's bid for the 1960 games.[7]  preliminary reports were drafted and submitted to the ioc, which was considering bids from innsbruck, austria, st. moritz, switzerland and chamonix, france.[5]  squaw valley was provisionally awarded the right to host the games, but ioc president avery brundage warned the organizing committee that unless more funds were secured by april 1956, the bid would be awarded to innsbruck.[8]  another $4,000,000 were committed by the state legislature, which met brundage's requirements. on april 4, 1956, the right to host the 1960 winter olympics was officially awarded to squaw valley.[9]  competitors and officials from european nations were angered by the selection; they felt that the alpine ski courses were not up to specifications and that the altitude would prove too stressful on the athletes.[10]
squaw valley in 1956 consisted of one chair lift, two rope tows, and a fifty-room lodge. cushing presented the site as a blank canvas of unspoiled environment, where a world-class ski resort could be constructed.[5]  the obscurity of the location was underscored at the closing ceremonies of the 1956 winter olympics. traditionally the mayor of the current host city passes a flag to the mayor of the next host city signalling the transfer of the games. since squaw valley was an unincorporated village it had no city government. john garland, an ioc member from california, was asked to stand in and received the flag from the mayor of cortina d'ampezzo.[5]
after winning the right to host the games, the california olympic commission was formed.[12]  they were given four years to build venues, an olympic village, and expand infrastructure. with the expansion of roads, bridges, water and electrical capacity the resort of squaw valley became the city of squaw valley. hotels, restaurants, administration buildings, a sheriff's office and a sewage pumping and treatment plant were all constructed to support the influx of visitors for the games.[13] organizers wanted the olympics to be intimate with the venues close to one another.[10]  the blyth memorial ice arena was built along with three outdoor skating rinks, a 400-meter speed skating oval and four dormitories to house athletes. one venue deemed impractical to build was the bobsled run. organizers felt the lack of possible entrants and the high cost of building the run were sufficient deterrents to leave the bobsled events off the 1960 olympic program.[12][14]
several design innovations and new technologies were used for the 1960 games. the speed skating, figure skating and ice hockey events were held on artificial ice for the first time in olympic history. a refrigeration plant capable of heating 4,800 homes had to be built to generate and maintain the ice. the heat generated from the refrigeration plant was used to warm spectators, provide hot water, and melt the snow off of roofs. new timing equipment provided by longines was installed that used a quartz clock to measure to the hundredths of a second. ibm provided a computer that was capable of tabulating results and printing them in english and french. blyth arena, site of the opening and closing ceremonies as well as the figure skating and ice hockey competitions, was built with a 22 in (56 cm) gap in the roof, which would slide closed as the cables supporting the roof contracted during cold weather.[15]
funding for cushing's initial bid to the ioc came from the california legislature and investors in the "squaw valley development company", who were owners of the existing resort.[5]  to fund the construction, organizers turned to the federal government, which provided about a quarter of the $80 million required to host the games. the monies were used to build sports arenas and provide military support during the games.[16]  further funding was secured from private sponsorships and from the state of california. governor knight and his successor edmund "pat" brown remained behind the project, seeing it as a means to showcase the state of california to the world.[12]
television was not new to the olympic winter games; broadcasts of events to european audiences had begun in 1956.[17]  what was unprecedented was the sale of exclusive united states television rights to broadcast the games. the organizing committee decided to sell the television broadcast rights to cbs for $50,000.[18][19]  unknown at the time was how lucrative the sale of broadcast rights would become. for example, cbs purchased the rights to broadcast the 1960 summer olympics for $550,000.[18]  during the games, cbs broadcast 15 and a quarter hours of television focusing on ice hockey, speed skating, figure skating, alpine skiing and ski jumping.[20]  the impact of television was felt during the games; in the men's slalom event, officials who were unsure if a skier had missed a gate asked cbs if they could review tape of the event. this request gave cbs the idea for what is now known as instant replay.[6]
athletic competition between the soviet union and united states had grown intense during the 1950s. their opposing ideologies and interests in nations such as east and west germany, china and north and south korea created a delicate situation as the 1960 winter games approached. of particular interest was the question of whether china would be allowed to participate.[1]  chinese athletes last competed at the 1952 summer games but had since withdrawn from the ioc due to a dispute over taiwan's participation as a separate country.[21] the united states supported taiwan while the soviet union stood behind china. given the fact that the 1960 games were to be held in america, there was concern among ioc members that the united states would not allow china or any other communist country to participate.[1] in 1957, ioc president avery brundage, himself an american, announced that if the united states refused entry to any country recognized by the ioc, then they would revoke squaw valley's invitation to host the games and he would resign the presidency.[22] bowing to international pressure, the united states allowed athletes from communist countries to participate. china continued to demand that taiwan be expelled from the ioc, demands that were refused until china broke off relations ending any hope that they would participate in 1960.[23]
problems similar to the issue with china broke out over north korea and east germany. prior to the korean war the ioc had recognized the olympic committee of korea, which was headquartered in seoul. north korea was not recognized as a separate country by the ioc who maintained the existence of one olympic committee. a unified team compromise was proposed but rejected, which meant only athletes from south korea participated due to their prior recognition.[24]  pressure for full recognition of east germany continued despite the fact that both east and west germany had participated as a unified team in 1956. one of the conditions for a unified german team was that the athletes be represented by a neutral flag. initially west german officials refused to agree to this stipulation citing the fact that the west german flag had been used at both the 1956 winter and summer games. eventually the neutral flag was adopted and a unified german team participated.[25]
the games were held from february 18 to 28.[6]  medals were awarded in 27 events contested in 4 sports (8 disciplines).[10]  the sport of biathlon was added to the program as were speed skating events for women. after a poll was taken indicating that only nine countries would send a bobsled team, the organizers determined that bobsled would be removed from the olympic program. despite petitions from the international bobsleigh and tobogganing federation to reconsider, the organizers felt they could not justify the costs of constructing a bobsled run for nine competing nations. it would be the only time in winter olympic history that the bobsled events were not held.[10][14]
the chairman of the pageantry committee was walt disney, who was responsible for producing both the opening and closing ceremonies.[10] he organized an opening that included 5,000 entertainers, the release of 2,000 pigeons, and a military gun salute of eight shots, one for each of the previous winter olympic games.[26][27] the opening ceremonies were held on february 18, 1960, at blyth arena in the midst of a blizzard. the heavy snow fall caused traffic problems that delayed the ceremony by an hour. the festivities began with a sustained drum roll as the flags of each participating nation were raised on specially designed flag poles. vice president richard nixon represented the united states government and declared the games open.[28] the olympic cauldron was lit by kenneth henry, olympic champion of the 500 meter speed skating race at the 1952 winter olympics in oslo. the olympic oath was taken by carol heiss on behalf of all the athletes. as the national delegations left the stadium fireworks concluded the ceremonies.[29]
the ice hockey tournament took place at blyth arena and the squaw valley olympic skating rink.[30]  controversy over the amateur status of some of the players overshadowed the event. canadian olympic officials objected to the use of "professional amateurs" by eastern bloc countries, and especially the soviet union. they alleged that the soviets were giving their elite hockey players phantom jobs in the military that allowed them to play hockey full-time, which gave soviet teams an advantage that they used to dominate olympic hockey tournaments for nearly 30 years.[31]  this issue started coming to light during the 1960 games and would culminate in a canadian boycott of the olympic hockey tournament at the 1972 and 1976 winter olympics.[32]  the team from the united states won an improbable gold medal, defeating the favored canadian and soviet teams, who took silver and bronze respectively.[33]  this was the first olympic gold medal in ice hockey for the united states and it would mark the last time a soviet team did not win the olympic tournament until the united states victory at the 1980 winter olympics.[34]
there were six cross-country skiing races at the 1960 olympics, four for men and two for women, all held at the mckinney creek cross-country complex. soviet women swept the 10 kilometer race, which was the first medal sweep for the soviets at the winter olympics.[35][36]  they were however upset by sweden in the 3×5 kilometer relay.[35]  nordic countries dominated the men's competition. swedish lumberjack sixten jernberg added a gold and silver to the four medals he won in 1956. he would add two golds and a bronze in 1964 to finish his olympic career with nine medals, which made him the most decorated winter olympian.[37][38] finnish skier veikko hakulinen added a gold, silver and bronze to the two golds and two silvers he had won in 1952 and 1956.[39][40]
biathlon made its olympic debut in 1960. the precursor to biathlon, military patrol, was on the olympic program for the first olympic games in 1924. it was a demonstration sport at the 1928, 1936, and 1948 winter olympics, though the competition was only open to members of the armed forces. military patrol fell out of favor in 1948 due to anti-military sentiments in the post world war ii era.[41]  biathlon took its place and was instated as a full olympic sport in 1960. it encompassed a 20 kilometer cross-country race with four shooting stations at ranges from 100 to 250 m (330 to 820 ft).[42] klas lestander from sweden became the first olympic champion, antti tyrväinen from finland and soviet aleksandr privalov placed second and third respectively.[43]
the nordic combined competition was held on february 21 at the squaw valley normal hill and the mckinney creek cross-country complex. the athletes had three jumps on february 21 followed by a 15 kilometer cross-country race.[44] german skier georg thoma became the first non-nordic athlete to win the event. he would win bronze medal in the nordic combined in 1964.[45] tormod knutsen of norway and nikolay gusakov of the soviet union placed second and third, respectively. gusakov's wife, maria gusakova, competed in the cross-country events, winning a gold and silver.[44][46]
there was one ski jumping event at the 1960 games, the men's normal hill, which was held on february 28. in 1964, the competition would be expanded to include a men's large hill event. helmut recknagel became the first german to win the event.[47][48]  in 1994 he would be joined by jens weißflog as the only german ski jumping olympic champions.[49] niilo halonen from finland and austrian otto leodolter earned the silver and bronze medals.[47]
held at blyth memorial arena, the figure skating competition took place between february 19 and 26. although this was not the first time figure skating had been held indoors, it would never be contested outdoors again.[50]  there were three events: men's and women's singles and the pairs competition. in the men's event, david jenkins of the united states, brother of 1956 winter olympic figure skating champion hayes jenkins, won the gold medal.[39]  it was his second olympic medal, having won the bronze in 1956.[51] czechoslovakian karol divín took the silver medal, and canadian donald jackson won the bronze.[50][52] american carol heiss, winner of the silver medal in 1956, became the olympic champion in 1960. a year later she married hayes jenkins and starred in snow white and the three stooges.[53] dutch skater sjoukje dijkstra took the silver medal; she would finish her amateur career with an olympic gold medal in 1964.[54] barbara ann roles gave the united states its third figure skating medal of the competition when she took the bronze. the soviet union made its olympic figure skating debut by sending two couples to compete in the pairs competition; the result belied the fact that soviet skaters would soon come to dominate this event.[50]  the competition was won by the canadian pair of barbara wagner and bob paul who had won the last three world championships. the german pair marika kilius and hans-jürgen bäumler followed their recent european championship victory with the olympic silver medal, and the american husband-and-wife team of ron and nancy ludington took the bronze.[55]
women were allowed to compete in the olympic speed skating competition for the first time in 1960. multiple nations had requested the inclusion of women's speed skating events in the program for the 1956 games, but the request was rejected by the ioc.[56]  the issue was revisited for the 1960 games, and since women had been competing internationally since 1936 and there was a world championship for women's speed skating, the ioc agreed to four events; 500, 1,000, 1,500, and 3,000 meters.[57]  most of the events were held on the squaw valley olympic skating rink, which was an outdoor skating oval, and featured artificial ice, a first for the olympic speed skating competition. given the altitude and the artificial ice, the rink was the fastest in the world, as evidenced by norwegian knut johannesen’s world record in the 10,000 meter event. at 15:46.6 he was the first skater ever to break the 16-minute barrier, and eclipsed the previous world record by 46 seconds.[57]  despite johannesen's victory, the soviets dominated the speed skating events, winning all but two of the races. yevgeny grishin won both the 500 and 1,500 meter races, though he shared the 1,500 meter gold medal with norwegian roald aas. grishin said that “watching the soviet flag wave in the blue american sky” was the proudest moment of his life.[58][59] lidiya skoblikova from the soviet union was the other double gold medalist, when she won the 1,500 and 3,000 meter events. polish skaters helena pilejczyk and elwira seroczyńska placed second and third in the 1,500 meter event, which were poland's only medals of the games. they were just the second and third poles ever to win winter olympic medals.[60]
despite the lack of facilities at squaw valley, the resort did have steep mountain slopes in close proximity, resulting in some of the most difficult alpine skiing courses in olympic history.[39]  both men and women competed in the downhill, giant slalom and slalom with all 6 events held between february 20 and 26.[61]  the men's downhill was won by frenchman jean vuarnet who changed the sport by becoming the first olympic champion to use metal skis.[39] swiss skier roger staub won the giant slalom and ernst hinterseer from austria was the slalom champion. german heidi biebl won the women's downhill, yvonne rüegg of switzerland won the giant slalom and anne heggtveit from canada won the slalom. penny pitou of the united states was the only multiple medal winner with two silvers in the downhill and giant slalom.[61]
the games were brought to a close on february 28 in blyth memorial arena in front of 20,000 people. flags of the participating nations were followed by the athletes who marched as a group with no national distinctions, a tradition carried over from the 1956 summer olympics. the flag bearers made a semi-circle around the rostrum and the national anthems of greece (even though the nation didn't compete), united states, and austria were played as their respective flags were raised.[62]  ioc president avery brundage declared the games closed, at which point the olympic flame was extinguished. the games concluded with the release of several thousand balloons.[63]
the opening ceremony was held on february 18, along with the first games of the ice hockey tournament. from february 19 to 28, at least one event final was held each day.[64]
† the numeral indicates the number of event finals for each sport held that day.

the lack of facilities prior to the olympics gave organizers freedom to tailor the layout of the venues to fit the needs of the athletes.[65]  their vision was for an intimate games in which athletes and spectators could walk between venues.[5]  this was accomplished with the exception of the cross-country events, which were held at mckinney creek, a 12 mi (19 km) drive from squaw valley.[12]  in prior winter olympics the athletes were housed in hotels or billeted with local families. since no such facilities existed in squaw valley, the organizers decided to build the first olympic village at the winter games.[66] competitors slept in one of four dormitories and ate together in a dining room. the complex was located centrally, with access to all the sporting facilities.[65]
the peaks surrounding squaw valley were used for the alpine skiing events. the ladies' downhill and men's slalom and giant slalom were on kt-22 mountain, while the ladies' slalom and giant slalom were contested on little papoose peak. squaw peak was the site of the men's downhill competition. prior to the games, concerns persisted that the courses would not meet international standards. to address these concerns, a test event was held in 1959 and the attending delegates from the international ski federation (fis) left assured that the events would comply with fis rules and specifications. bleachers were constructed for officials, coaches and spectators, along with broadcast booths for radio and television.[67] papoose peak jumps was located on little papoose peak directly opposite blyth memorial arena. designed by heini klopfer, the hill was innovative in that it had 40-, 60-, and 80–meter jumps. tall trees on both sides protected athletes from the wind, and it was situated so that the sun would be at the jumper's back during the competition.[68]
mckinney creek stadium was built to host all of the cross-country races, which included the biathlon and a portion of the nordic combined competition. it consisted of a timing building, two quonset huts for competitors and course workers, a scoreboard, and bleachers to accommodate 1,200 people. shooting ranges were interspersed throughout the biathlon course, and were supervised by non-commissioned officers of the united states military.[69]
season tickets for the games ranged from $60 to $250, the latter included a reserved seat at the ice arena; the daily admission fee was $7.50.[70]
blyth memorial arena was the centerpiece of the games. it hosted the opening and closing ceremonies jointly with squaw valley olympic skating rink, and also hosted the figure skating competition, a few of the speed skating events, as well as most of the games in the hockey tournament.[71]  all three of the sports were held indoors on artificial ice for the first time in olympic history.[30]  at full capacity, the arena accommodated 11,000 people, 8,500 of whom were seated.[72]  one end of the stadium could be opened and closed, depending on the event. during the ceremonies it was open to allow for the entrance of the athletes; during the competitions it was closed to accommodate more spectators. a special machine was created to resurface the ice for all three competitions. it could lay a new ice surface on the 400-meter speed skating track in 45 minutes. in addition to resurfacing the ice, the machine created the snow dividers that delineated the racing lanes.[30]  the roof was designed on a suspension principle, using cables rather than vertical supports; this removed any visual impediments for the audience, but it weakened the strength of the roof. given the amount of annual snowfall designers planned on using heat generated by the refrigeration plant to melt the snow.[15][30]  there were flaws in the design and miscalculations in the load the roof could bear, and during a particularly heavy snowfall in 1983, a portion of the roof collapsed and the building was subsequently demolished.[33]
as of 2016[update], only three buildings from the 1960 winter olympics remain in squaw valley.[73] an expansion of the resort's village, currently in the planning stages, would see two of these buildings demolished.[73]
athletes from 30 nations competed at the 1960 games. south africa competed at the winter games for the first time; it would be the last for many years, as apartheid policies prevented south african participation until 1994. athletes from west germany (frg) and east germany (gdr) competed together as the united team of germany from 1956 to 1964. the number at the end of each country denotes the number of athletes each country sent.[74]
below is a list of nations that won medals at the games:
‡ since there was a tie in the men's 1,500 meter speed skating race (like in 1956), two gold medals and no silver medals were awarded.[75]
notes
citations
coordinates: 39°11′47″n 120°14′01″w﻿ / ﻿39.19631°n 120.23356°w﻿ / 39.19631; -120.23356
the 1964 winter olympics, officially known as the ix olympic winter games (french: les ixes jeux olympiques d'hiver)  (german: olympische winterspiele 1964), was a winter multi-sport event which was celebrated in innsbruck, austria, from january 29 to february 9, 1964. the games included 1091 athletes from 36 nations, and the olympic torch was carried by joseph rieder,[1] a former alpine skier who had participated in the 1956 winter olympics.
the games were affected by the deaths of australian alpine skier ross milne and british luge slider kazimierz kay-skrzypeski, during training, and by the deaths, three years earlier, of the entire us figure skating team and family members.
innsbruck competed against calgary, canada, and lahti, finland, for the right to host the 1964 winter olympics. here is the resulting vote count that occurred at the 55th ioc session, in munich, west germany, on may 26, 1959:[2]
medals were awarded in 34 events contested in 6 sports (10 disciplines).
36 nations sent athletes to compete in innsbruck.  india, mongolia, and north korea participated in the winter games for the first time.  athletes from west germany (frg) and east germany (gdr) competed together as the united team of germany from 1956 to 1964.
these are the top ten nations that won medals at these games:
  *   host nation (austria)two fatal events before the 1964 winter olympics affected the outcome and mood of the games:
notes
citations

the 1968 winter olympics, officially known as the x olympic winter games (french: les xes jeux olympiques d'hiver), were a winter multi-sport event which was celebrated in 1968 in grenoble, france, and opened on 6 february. thirty-seven countries participated.
frenchman jean-claude killy won three gold medals in all the alpine skiing events. in women's figure skating, peggy fleming won the only united states gold medal. the games have been credited with making the winter olympics more popular in the united states, not least of which because of abc's extensive coverage of fleming and killy, who became overnight sensations among teenage girls.
the year 1968 marked the first time the ioc first permitted east and west germany to enter separately, and the first time the ioc ever ordered drug and gender testing of competitors.
on 24 november 1960 the prefect of the isère département, françois raoul, and the president of the dauphiné ski federation, raoul arduin, officially presented for the first time the idea of hosting the 1968 winter olympic games in grenoble. after the city council agreed in principle, different government agencies offered their support, and the villages around grenoble also reacted positively, an application committee was formed and led by albert michallon, the former mayor of grenoble on 30 december 1960. the application was officially given to the ioc during a meeting between ioc executives and representatives of international sport agencies in lausanne in february 1963.
in the application the decision was not solely based on sport because in the isère département there had only been two important sport events, the bobsleigh world championships of 1951 in l'alpe d'huez and the luge world championships of 1959 in villard-de-lans. between 1946 and 1962 the number of inhabitants in grenoble increased from 102,000 to 159,000, and the total inhabitants in the département isère increased from 139,000 to 250,000. the development of the infrastructure could not keep up with this rapid increase and was for the most part at the same level as before the second world war. the people who were responsible never made a secret out of it that it was mainly for them about using the olympic games to receive larger grants to quickly develop dated infrastructure and support the local economy.
the 61st ioc session, where the awarding of the olympic games should have been voted for, should have taken place in nairobi. this session was moved to baden-baden because kenya refused entry to ioc members from portugal and south africa for political reasons. due to a lack of time only the summer games of 1968 could be voted for. the vote finally took place in innsbruck on 28 january 1964, one day before the start of the 1964 winter olympic games. 51 members who were eligible to vote were in attendance and grenoble were awarded the games after the third round of voting and were competing against calgary, who were awarded the games 20 years later.
after grenoble was voted as the host city the french national olympic sports committee decided the foundation of the organisation committee. the comité d'organisation des dixièmes jeux olympiques (cojo), the committee for the organisation of the 10th olympic games, started to plan the games for the first time on 1 august 1964. albert michallon, alongside being the former mayor of grenoble, was also president of cojo. the upper panel was made up of the general assembly with its 340 members and the supervisory board conduct business with 39 members, 19 of which were appointed and the other 20 were voted for. the general secretary consisted of five main departments and 17 subordinate departments. the number of employees grew to 1920 in february 1968.
the french government played a major role in the preparations for the games because president charles de gaulle saw an opportunity in the winter olympic games to present grenoble as a symbol for a modern france. minister for youth and sport francois missoffe formed an interministerial committee for the coordination of the work commissioned by prime minister georges pompidou. just over 7000 soldiers of the french armed forces and also employees of the ministries for youth and sport, finance, social building, education, post, culture and transport were employed. the sum of the investments contributed to 1.1 billion francs (roughly 775 million pounds). the government contributed 47.08%, the isere department 3.65%, the city of grenoble 20.07% and the surrounding communities 1.37%. different institutions, such as the train company sncf; the television broadcaster ortf; the government housing association and the regional association of hospitals provided the rest of the money.
these means were used accordingly - 465.181 million francs for the infrastructure of transport and communications, 250.876 million for the olympic village and press area, 92.517 million for the sports arenas, 57.502 million for television and radio, 45.674 million for culture, 95.116 million for the city's infrastructure and 90.429 million for the running of cojo. they built a new airport, two motorway sections of 7.5 miles and 15 miles, a switchboard, a new town hall, a new police station, a fire station, a hospital with 560 beds, a congress and exhibition centre and a culture palace. they upgraded the access road to the outer sport arenas, an orbital road round grenoble as well as relocating the rail tracks and removing the level crossings and building a completely new main train station.
to test the new sport complex and to improve organisational processes they organized "international sports weeks". from 20 january to 19 february 1967 speed skating competitions and ski races took place, from 12 to 15 october 1967 an ice hockey tournament and from 23 to 25 november a figure-skating competition.
on 16 december 1967, the olympic torch was lit in ancient olympia in greece. the ceremony initially should have taken place on 13 december but it had to be postponed because of the (in the end unsuccessful) coup d'état of king constantine ii, who had been forced from his throne eight months before, against the dictatorial military regime of georgios papadopoulos. the route of the torch relay at first led over mount olympus to athens. from there, the torch was flown by an air france boeing 707 to the paris-orly airport. there the torch was received by jean vuarnet, the 1960 downhill olympic gold medalist, on 19 december, who handed it on to the first torchbearer alain mimoun, the 1956 marathon olympic gold medalist.
the torch relay in france went over a distance of 7,222 kilometers through 41 districts and 170 towns to the isère district. all in all 5,000 torchbearers, who transported the torch on foot, by bike, by boat, by skies or by motorbike, took part in the relay. the part of the way that led through the old harbour of marseilles was done by a diver who, while swimming, held the torch just over the surface of the water. the torchbearers were accompanied by around 80,000 athletes and watched by an audience of about two million people. the last stop on the day before the opening ceremony was saint-pierre-de-chartreuse. from there, the torch was carried to grenoble.
the 33 torches that were used in the relay were produced by the société technique d'équipement, a firm of the compagnie de saint-gobain. they were 70 cm tall, weighed 1750 g, were made of copper and had a propane gas tank. the reserve flames (a cautionary measure in case the torch went out) burned in twenty carbide lamps, the same as the olympic fire when it was transported from athens to paris in a plane.
the logo portrays a floating snow crystal, which is surrounded by three stylised roses and is on top of the single-coloured (in white) olympic rings. the roses can be found in the same pattern (two on the top and one below) as grenoble's emblem. the logo is surrounded by "xes jeux olympiques d'hiver 1968 grenoble" (the 10th winter olympic games, 1968, grenoble.)
for the first time there was an olympic mascot, although it was unofficial. the mascot was called schuss, who is a stylised skier wearing a blue skiing costume and a large red ball as a head. the mascot designed by aline lafargue was hardly recognised publicly. it had unofficial character, was marked with great restraint and appeared solely on pins and several toys.
jack lesage, who specialised in mountain and winter sport recordings filmed two olympic advertisements of 15–18 minutes in length before the olympic games took place contracted by the organisation committee. "trois roses, cinq anneaux" (three roses, five rings) emerged in 1966 and showed grenoble as well as the surrounding venues in the early stage of the preparation. in 1967 "vaincre à grenoble (victory in grenoble), which documented the progress of the workers, complemented with images of the sport competitions. both films appeared in three different versions with french, english and german commentary. in france the films were shown in cimemas before particular feature films, abroad for receptions and presentations.
the french post office issued six olympic themed postage stamps. on 22 april 1967 a label next appeared worth 0.60 francs with the official logo as its motif. on 27 january 1968, 10 days before the opening ceremony, a series of five semi-postal stamps followed. the designs were ski jumpers and skiers (0.30++ 0,10 f), ice hockey players (0.40 + 0,10 f), the olympic torch (0.60 + 0.20 f), a female ice skater (0.75 + 0.25 f) and slalom racers (0.95 + 0.35 f). the proceeds from the supplement stamps were split between the french red cross and the organisation committee.
there were five other venues surrounding grenoble used as sporting venues for the olympic games in 1968. like never before seen at a winter olympic games, the venues were divided into four different places. grenoble set a new trend by having venues in different parts of the surrounding area. before it was common place to have all the venues together. compared to the investments for the infrastructure, the investments for building sports arenas was very small. this investment only contributed nine percent.
almost half of this investment, 46 million francs, was used to build the new ice rink stade de glace (today palais des sports), and where group a's ice hockey matches, the figure skating competition and the closing ceremony all took place. the arena has 12,000 seats and is situated in parc paul mistral, grenoble's town park located in the centre of the city. the architects were robert demartini and pierre junillon. construction began in mid-november 1965 and finished in october 1967. the roof was made of two cylindrical which crossed over each other, four columns which could support 10,000 tonnes. today the arena is used for concerts, fairs and various other sporting events (among others six-day races since 1971)
less than 100m away from the stade de glace, and also in parc paul mistral, the 400m track for the speed skating events was installed between february and november 1966. the venue patinoire de vitesse which does not have a roof and in the middle of it has a practice ice-rink, had a capacity of 2,500. the cooling system was removed after a few years and today the concrete track is used by roller skaters. the only ready venue was the city's ice-rink patinoire municipale, which opened in september 1963, next to the speed skating track, where the 1964 figure skating european championship took place. the arena, which has 2,000 seats and 700 can stand, was the venue for group b's ice hockey matches.
the venue for the alpine skiing took place in chamrousse, a town 30 kilometres east of grenoble. the finishing line for five out of the six races was in the region of recoin de chamrousse, the other was the men's downhill event was in casserousse. in the construction of the new ski slopes around 300,000m³ of rocks had to be blown up or dug away, particularly large movements of the earth and changes to the terrain were necessary in the upper part of the men's downhill section and in the slalom section. in addition six new chairlifts were installed. in the preparation of the slopes over 10,000 people were needed, this consisted mainly of soldiers.
in autrans, 36 kilometres west of grenoble in vercors massif, the cross-country skiing event and biathlon took place there. provisional stands at the finish line were available for spectators, which were to the north and southwest of the village. also in autrans, the ski jumping in the normal hill took place. the ski jumping hill of le claret is still in use today. it originally had a hill size of 70m, but later was made bigger and now measures 90m high.
the 90m hill could have been built without any problems in autrans, but the organisers decided instead to use saint-nizier-du-moucherotte, 17 kilometres away from grenoble, as well as vercors-massif. the relatively small distance to the city and the better accessibility guaranteed a larger audience. the construction period lasted from july 1966 to january 1967. after the games the dauphine hill was only rarely used for competitions and since 1990 it closed down and fell into ruin. a third olympic venue in the vercors-massif was villard-de-lens, 34 kilometres from grenoble, where the luge competition took place. the track is exactly 1,000m long, has 14 curves and has a drop of 110m. after it temporarily closed down in 1994 it was remodelled. today it now has an artificial surface which makes it possible to use all-year-round. it is no longer used for competitions.
the third olympic venue in vercors massif was 34 km away from grenoble in the commune of villard-de-lans, where the luge competition took place. the track for the luge was exactly 1 km long, had 14 corners and had a drop of 110m. after the track was temporarily closed in 1994, it was rebuilt at today's location. it has an artificial surface, which makes using the track all year round possible. for competitions it is no longer used.
the furthest distance, which is also the highest, is l'alpe d'huez, 65 kilometres southeast of grenoble. the bobsleigh took place at col de poutran at a height of around 2,000m. it was 1,500m long, had 13 corners and had a drop of 140m. it was principally a natural course but three of the corners were exposed to direct sunlight and was kept artificially frozen by ammonia and liquid nitrogen. in l'alpe d'huez a replacement course was made available for the alpine skiing.
the olympic village was located in the southern part of the city on the border with the suburbs of échirolles and eybens. on the site of the former airport grenoble-mermoz, a large housing estate with 6,500 rooms was built in two years. a primary school, a secondary school, a nursery, a youth centre, a shopping centre and a library were all built as part of the construction of the housing estate. all of these were still in use after the olympic games. the male athletes were housed in a tower block and in eleven apartment blocks. the female athletes lived in a building with 263 individual rooms, which later went on to serve as a home for workers. in other buildings on the estate housed around 12,000 trainers, officials, timekeepers, volunteers, police and drivers. the catering took plate in a future school kitchen. two more, much smaller olympic villages were available to the nordic and alpine skiers as well as their physios. holiday homes were also newly built and were located in autrans and chamrousse. one year before the olympics, at the pre-olympic competitions there was great adversity. the accommodation did not meet the necessary standards, so much so the austrian team left. this led the hosts to have a rethink and make improvements.
there were 35 events contested in 6 sports (10 disciplines).


in grenoble, there was 1158 athletes and 37 teams, which was a new record in terms of the number of participants. this was morocco's first appearance at the winter olympics.
similar to the summer olympics 1952, when saarland who had sent its own team but had not been integrated as a part of west germany, there were two teams participating from germany.
for the first time, the german democratic republic (east germany) was present with its own team. it was provisionally accepted into the ioc, so long as east germany formed a complete german team consisting of athletes from both the west and east. this had to be done under the leadership of the national olympic committee for germany, a board recognised by the ioc. following on from this the national olympic committee of east germany tried to achieve complete recognition. this did not work out because of resistance  from karl ritter von halt, the president of the national olympic committee for germany, who was close friends with the ioc president avery brundage. after halt died in 1961, the same year that the berlin wall was built, under his successor willi daume the close contact with the ioc leadership was lost. in addition the reality of the split made the qualification almost impossible. on 8 october 1965 the ioc decided to accept east germany as a full member. in order to avoid existing restrictions concerning nato countries, such as the ban on all east german symbols, in particular the flag with socialist symbols introduced in 1959, both national olympic committees agreed on using the same flag and anthem. the black-red-gold flag with the white olympic rings in the middle of it has been used at all olympic games since 1960, as well as the replacement anthem "ode an die freude" (ode to joy) from beethoven's 9th symphony, which was used previously. both countries presented themselves as completely independent from 1972.
on 21 january 1968, ralph pöhland, who was 21, was one of the most famous east german winter olympians, fled to west germany after the pre-olympic tournament at les bioux, switzerland. his assistant in helping to flee was georg thoma, a west german ski jumper. this incident lead to relationships between the two german teams turning sour, which never used to be the case.
these are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1968 winter games.
  *   host nation (france)for the olympic winter games in grenoble, in total 228 gold, silver and bronze medals were manufactured. they were designed by roger excoffon and was coined by the french minting company monnaie de paris. for the first time in olympic history, the medals, given out for the winners in every sport, had their own design. the logo of the games was depicted on the front of the medal and on the other was a pictogram etched into the surface, that depicted the sport the medal winner competed in. the medals had an diameter of 50 mm (2 in) and were 3 mm (0 in) thick. the gold and silver medals consisted of silver with a composition of 925/1000, but the gold medals were coated in an additional six grams of gold. the medals hang of ribbons in the olympic colours, which happened to also be a first, before 1968 they had used chains. in addition, the athletes received a box made of black leather, which was lined with either white, blue or red silk.
the commemoration medal was designed by josette hébert-coeffin. the front side of the medal depicted the decorated head of a greek athlete with snowflakes and ice crystals in the background. the other side of the medal depicted the silhouette of grenoble in front of the mountain range belladonne. there were three different types of medals. 20 were made of silver, 210 of silver-coated bronze and 15,000 of bronze.
excoffon also designed the olympic diplomas, which were given to the six best athletes in each discipline. they were made of cream coloured parchment paper. around the logo contained the words "xes jeux olympiques d'hiver grenoble 1968" as well as the olympic motto - citius, altius, fortius, meaning quicker, higher, stronger. in the middle of the paper, the word "diplome" was written in gold writing. however, similar diplome were handed out to officials, participants, journalists and volunteers on ordinary white paper and without the gold writing as a souvenir.
the medal ceremony took place in the evening of the finals event in the stade de glace.
compared to the winter olympics in 1964 in innsbruck, the number of disciplines increased to 35, the men's biathlon relay was also added.
on 4 february, two days before the official opening ceremony, three ice hockey preliminary matches took place, in order to place three further teams into group a alongside the five teams already assigned to the group. the losers were placed into group b.
for the opening ceremony, a temporary stadium was built supported by scaffolding and was able to hold 60,000 spectators. the stade inaugural was situated in the immediate vicinity to the olympic village and press centre. at the back of the stadium there was a steel scaffold which kept host to the olympic flame, located in a 4m wide bowl at the top, which also was able to take 550 kg in weight. there was also stairs leading to the top, containing 96 flights.
the ceremony began on 6 february at 3pm, a tuesday, with the french president charles de gaulle in attendance. among the 500 invited guests of honour was ioc president avery brundage, the irani empress farah pahlavi, the danish crown princess margrethe and the grand duchess of luxembourg josephine charlotte. after the marseillaise was sung, the french national anthem, cultural performances followed.
the procession of the athletes into the stadium was traditionally led by the greek team. the other teams proceeded into the stadium in alphabetical order, starting with west germany (allemagne) and then east germany (allemagne d'est). the last team out was the hosts, the french team. albert michallon, president of cojo, said in his speech that all athletes and visitors are welcome. brundage again recollected pierre de coubertin's ideals and expressed the hope of these ideals lead to a peaceful and less materialistic world. he invited charles de gaulle to open the games. de gaulle appeared on the stage and read out the opening set-phrase.
14 chasseurs alpins soldiers carried the olympic flag into the stadium and put it up. the organisers had decided against the usual tradition of letting the peace dove fly. instead they let out 500 small olympic flags on paper parachutes and 30,000 perfumed artificial roses from three helicopters over the stadium. following this, the figure skater alain calmat was the last torch bearer to enter the stadium. he climbed up the steps to the bowl, where his heartbeat amplified over the loudspeakers. once at the top, he lit the olympic flame.
shortly afterwards, skier leo lacroix read out the olympic oath. at the end, the patrouille de france, the aerobatic flight display team, flew over the stadium and marked out the colours of the olympic rings with their vapour trails in the sky.
the winter olympics ended on 18 february, on a sunday evening, with the closing ceremony in the stade de glace. the first highlight showed the figure skaters putting on an exhibition skating session. it also included ice dancing, an event that was first introduced into the main programme in 1976. the best ten partners from the last world championship took part in the event and there was no scores. after that the last award ceremonies then took place.
after the marseillaise was played, all athletes who were still in grenoble reassembled onto the ice and the flag bearers formed a semi-circle. whilst the flags of greece, france and next host japan were put up, a torch bearer brought the olympic flame into the stadium and ignited it into a bowl on the ice. ioc president avery brundage thanked the organisers and declared the games over. when the olympic flag was pulled down, gun salutes were heard all across the town and finally the flame went out.
at the age of 11 years and 158 days, the romanian figure skater beatrice huștiu became the youngest female participant at these winter games. she took part in the singles event and finished in 29th place, which was 3rd from bottom. the youngest male participant was aged 12 years and 110 days. he was also a figure skater called jan hoffmann, who represented east germany. in grenoble he finished in 26th place and was also 3rd from bottom. in 1974 and 1980 he became world champion and also in 1980 he won silver in the olympic games at lake placid.
the american speed skater dianne holum was the youngest medal winner. she won silver in the 500m event at the age of 16 years and 266 days. two days later she added a bronze by competing in the 1000m event. the youngest gold medal winner was also from the usa: she was figure skater peggy fleming, who won at the age of 19 years and 198 days.
the oldest medal winner and at the same time oldest gold medal winner was the italian eugenio monti: he won the gold medal in the four man bobsleigh team at the age of 40 years and 25 days. five days before that he had also won the two man bobsleigh team gold medal.
the public became more and more aware of the doping issue during the 1960s. the first death caused by doping at the olympic games happened in 1960 in rome, when the danish cyclist knut enemark jensen, who took amphetamines, fell off his bike and died. this took a further four years until the ioc recognised the seriousness of the situation and created a medical commission. in 1967, the ioc followed the example set by other sport associations and proclaimed a ban on doping. for the first time, doping control was carried out at the 1968 winter olympics. the ioc tested 86 athletes but all the tests came back negative.
also in 1967, the ioc decided to carry out gender controls, in order to prevent hermaphrodites from competing at women's competitions. multiple female athletes from eastern europe immediately retired after the ioc had decided this, which led to a lot of speculation. erik(a) schinegger, the female downhill 1966 world champion from austria, was tested a couple of days before the winter games in 1968, it turned out she was actually a man. schinegger, whose gender had not been correctly identified for years because she had internal male sex organs, decided to have the operation and changed her first name from erika to erik.
the media representatives lived in an apartment complex that was built between april 1966 and october 1967 a few hundred meters away from the olympic village in malherbe, a central part of grenoble. the complex consisted of seven eight to ten floored towers totalling 637 flats, an underground car park and a school. the school housed an ibm computer center, a copy center, the studios of the french radio and tv broadcaster ortf and broadcasters from other countries, photo laboratories and other technical amenities. the offices of the newspaper and photo journalists, of the technicians and of the general administration were situated on the bottom floors of the towers, the other floors served as accommodation. the press restaurant was later used as a car park. there were also smaller press centers in the stade de glace in grenoble and at the five other venues in autrans, chamrousse, l'alpe d'huez, saint-nizier-du-moucherotte and villard-de-lans.
the organising committee cojo assigned 1,545 accreditations to the following people. 1,095 went to press, radio and television journalists, 301 to photographers and 149 to other unnamed groups. on 19 september 1966, cojo signed an exclusive contract with ortf for the provision of broadcasting on the television to ebu's catchment area and to canada. on 14 february 1967, the american broadcasting company (abc) received the exclusive broadcasting rights for the us and latin america. on 15 october 1967, nhk received the rights to broadcast in japan.
for the first time in the history of the olympic games, the games were transmitted in colour. ortf installed 25 colour and 37 black and white cameras (abc had an independent broadcasting system). the total broadcasting time lasted 150 hours and 15mins, 91 hours and 25 mins were in colour. the total number of viewers was recorded at 600 million,
concerning the question of scoring the men's freestyle figure skating and the unfortunate circumstances of the men's slalom, the bild am sonntag published the title "am ende kam der große krach" (at the end there was a great bust-up). the "münchner merkur" said that they would have tolerated schranz's disqualification, but the incidents in the figure skating had led to a bitter after taste.
notes
citations

the 1972 winter olympics, officially known as the xi olympic winter games (japanese: 第十一回オリンピック冬季競技大会, dai jūichi-kai orinpikku tōkikyōgi taikai) (french: les xies jeux olympiques d'hiver), were a winter multi-sport event which was held from february 3 to february 13, 1972, in sapporo, hokkaidō, japan. it was the first winter olympics to be held outside europe and north america, and only the third game (summer or winter) held outside those regions overall, after melbourne (1956 summer olympics) and tokyo (1964 summer olympics).
sapporo first won the rights to host the 1940 winter olympics, but japan resigned as the games' host after its 1937 invasion of china. the 1940 games were later cancelled. all the cities awarded games that were cancelled due to war have since hosted the games (london, tokyo, helsinki, sapporo and cortina d'ampezzo).
sapporo competed with banff, lahti, and salt lake city. the games were awarded at the 64th ioc session in rome, italy, on april 26, 1966.
in preparation, the japanese constructed new largescale facilities at sapporo and conducted a trial run a full year in advance of the games. an international sport week was held in february, 1971, to assess the city's preparations as well as "to test its civic mettle and hospitality", and this effort was acclaimed by olympic observers as "a complete success".[1] the development of new infrastructure proved to be a huge boon for the sapporo economy: by the time of the games, the national government had invested some us$500 million in upgrades, including a new subway.[1] the games' organizers themselves turned a healthy profit in part because they arranged a record $8.47 million for broadcast rights.[2]
¹ new facilities constructed in preparation for the olympic games. ² existing facilities modified or refurbished in preparation for the olympic games.
there were 35 events contested in 6 sports (10 disciplines).


35 nations participated in the 1972 winter olympics. the republic of china (commonly known as taiwan) and the philippines participated in their first winter olympic games.
these are the top eleven nations that won medals at these games. the host nation japan finished 11th.

the 1976 winter olympics, officially known as the xii olympic winter games (french: xiies jeux olympiques d'hiver, german: olympische winterspiele 1976), were a winter multi-sport event which was celebrated february 4–15, 1976 in innsbruck, austria. it was the second time the tyrolean city hosted the games, which were awarded to innsbruck after denver, the original host city, withdrew in 1972.
the cities of denver, colorado, united states; sion, switzerland; tampere, finland; and vancouver (with the garibaldi mountains), british columbia, canada, made bids for the games. the chart below displays the vote count for the 69th ioc meeting at amsterdam, netherlands, on may 12, 1970.
the selection process for the 1976 winter olympics consisted of four bids, and saw denver, united states, selected ahead of sion, switzerland; tampere, finland; and vancouver, british columbia, canada. the selection was made at the 70th ioc session in amsterdam on 12 may 1970.[1] in a statewide referendum on 7 november 1972, colorado voters rejected funding for the games, and for the only time a city awarded the games rejected them.[2] denver officially withdrew on 15 november, and the ioc then offered the games to whistler, british columbia, canada, but they too declined owing to a change of government following elections.  whistler would go on to be associated with neighbouring vancouver's successful bid for the 2010 games. salt lake city offered to host the games, but the ioc, still reeling from the denver rejection, declined and selected innsbruck to host the 1976 winter olympics, which had hosted the 1964 winter olympics games twelve years earlier, on 5 february 1973. salt lake city would then host the winter olympics in 2002.
the mascot of the 1976 winter olympics was schneemann a snowman in a red tyrolean hat.  designed by walter pötsch, schneeman was purported to represent the 1976 games as the "games of simplicity".  it was also regarded as a good-luck charm, to avert the dearth of snow that had marred the 1964 winter olympics in innsbruck.[3][4]
there were 37 events contested in 6 sports (10 disciplines).
ice dance made its olympic debut.
see the medal winners, ordered by sport:
37 nations participated in the 1976 winter olympic games. the games marked the final time the republic of china (taiwan) participated under the republic of china flag and name. after most of the international community recognized the people's republic of china as the legitimate government of all china, the roc was forced to compete under the name chinese taipei, under an altered flag and to use its national banner song instead of its national anthem. andorra and san marino participated in their first winter olympic games.
these are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1976 winter games.
  *   host nation (austria)notes
citations

the 1980 winter olympics, officially known as the xiii olympic winter games, was a multi-sport event which was celebrated from february 13 to february 24, 1980, in lake placid, new york, united states.[1] this was the second time the upstate new york village hosted the games, after 1932. the only other candidate city to bid for the games was vancouver-garibaldi, british columbia, canada, which withdrew before the final vote (though vancouver would eventually win the bid to host the 2010 winter olympics.)
the mascot of the games was "roni", a raccoon. the mask-like rings on a raccoon's face recall the goggles and hats worn by many athletes in winter sports. the sports were played at the olympic center, whiteface mountain, mt. van hoevenberg olympic bobsled run, the olympic ski jumps, the cascade cross country ski center, and the lake placid high school speed skating oval.
the selection process for the 1980 winter olympics consisted of one bid, from lake placid, united states. it was selected at the 75th international olympic committee (ioc) session in vienna on october 23, 1974.[2][3][4][5]
notable highlights included:
there were 38 events contested in 6 sports (10 disciplines). see the medal winners, ordered by sport:
the former will rogers memorial hospital was briefly used as press headquarters.[6]
these are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1980 winter games.
  *   host nation (united states)37 nocs participated.
cyprus made their olympic debut at the games. the people's republic of china and costa rica both made their winter olympic debut. the republic of china had boycotted the games over the ioc's recognition of the prc as "china", and its request for the republic of china to compete as "chinese taipei".[7]
roni is the olympic mascot of these games, created by don moss. the mascot is a racoon, which is a familiar animal from the mountainous region of the adirondacks where lake placid is situated. the name roni comes from the word racoon in iroquoian, the language of the native people from the region of the state of new york and lake placid and was chosen by lake placid school children.[8]
the official theme song for the 1980 winter olympics was "give it all you got" by the american flugelhorn player chuck mangione, who performed the song (along with the song "pina colada") live at the closing ceremony, with the hamilton philharmonic orchestra (canada).[9]
notes
citations

the 1984 winter olympics, officially known as the xiv olympic winter games (french: xives jeux olympiques d'hiver; serbo-croatian: xiv. zimske olimpijske igre / xiv зимске олимпијске игре; macedonian: xiv зимски олимписки игри; slovene: xiv olimpijske zimske igre), was a winter multi-sport event which took place from 8–19 february 1984 in sarajevo, yugoslavia, in what is now bosnia and herzegovina. other candidate cities were sapporo, japan; and gothenburg, sweden.
it was the first winter olympic games held in a socialist state and in a slavic language-speaking country. it was also the second olympics overall, as well as the second consecutive olympics, to be held in a socialist and in a slavic language-speaking country after the 1980 summer olympics were held in moscow, soviet union. furthermore, it was the first olympics held in the balkans after the first modern games in athens. the sarajevo games have also been the only olympics so far to be hosted by a non-aligned movement member.
the host city for the xiv winter olympics was announced on 18 may 1978 during an 80th session of the international olympic committee in athens, greece. sarajevo was selected over sapporo, japan (which hosted the games 12 years earlier) by a margin of three votes. gothenburg was the first city in sweden to lose a winter olympics bid, as other swedish cities such as falun and östersund would later lose their consecutive bids to calgary, albertville, lillehammer, nagano, and salt lake city respectively. sarajevo, capital of present-day bosnia and herzegovina, was part of the united yugoslavia at the time. 
the torch relay for the 1984 winter olympics started in olympia and then proceeded by airplane to dubrovnik. the total distance of the torch relay through yugoslavia was 5,289 kilometres (3,286 mi) (plus 2,879 kilometres (1,789 mi) of local routes). there were two main routes – one in the west (split – ljubljana – zagreb – sarajevo with 2,602 kilometres (1,617 mi) of length) and the other in the east (skopje – novi sad – belgrade – sarajevo with 2,687 kilometres (1,670 mi) of length). the final torchbearer, from a total of 1600, was figure skater sanda dubravčić, who received the torch from skier runner ivo čarman. today one of the two original torches is in slovenia in a private collection in žalec, slovenia. also 20 more torches are in greece owned by individual athletes, who were the torchbearers from ancient olympia to the nearby military airport and from athens domestic airport to the panathinaikon stadium where the ceremony of handing over the olympic flame to the sarajevo olympic games committee occurred.[citation needed]
readers of yugoslav newspapers were asked to choose the mascot for the 1984 winter olympics from a list of six finalists. the winner was vučko, the little wolf, designed by slovenian designer and illustrator jože trobec. the other finalists were a chipmunk, a lamb, a mountain goat, a porcupine, and a snowball.[4] the vučko is a long-time symbol of sarajevo.[citation needed]
skenderija complex:
there were 39 events contested in 6 sports (10 disciplines).



these are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1984 winter games.
a then record of 49 national olympic committees (nocs) entered athletes at the 1984 winter olympic games.
egypt, monaco, puerto rico, senegal, and the british virgin islands participated in their 1st winter olympic games.
the people's republic of china ended its boycott of the olympic games over the controversy regarding the ioc's recognition of the republic of china. the republic of china (taiwan) then competed as chinese taipei for the first time.
many smaller countries competed in these games, due to the funding program created by the ioc. the ioc decided that it would cover all expenses for one male and one female athlete, per country. this allowed countries with smaller athletic budgets to participate in the games.
1984 soviet postage stamp
1984 soviet postage stamp
1984 east german postage stamp
1984 east german postage stamp
igman ski-jumping hills during spring
yugoslavia postage stamps fdc (sarajevo 1984 winter olympics)
asim ferhatovic stadion (koševo stadium then)
notes
citations

the 1988 winter olympics, officially known as the xv olympic winter games (french: les xves jeux olympiques d'hiver), was a multi-sport event celebrated in and around calgary, alberta, canada, between february 13 and 28, 1988 and were the first winter olympics to be held over a whole two week period. the host city was selected in 1981 over falun, sweden, and cortina d'ampezzo, italy.  most events took place in calgary while several skiing events were held in the mountain resorts of nakiska and canmore, west of the city.  
a then-record 57 nations competed and 1,423 athletes participated. as it had in montreal in 1976, canada again failed to win a gold medal in an official medal event as the host nation. finnish ski jumper matti nykänen and dutch speed skater yvonne van gennip were individual medal leaders with each winning three gold medals. the games are also remembered for the "heroic failure" of british ski jumper eddie "the eagle" edwards, and the winter olympic début of the jamaica national bobsled team, both of which would be subjects of major feature films about their participation in the games.
the calgary games were at the time one of the most expensive olympics ever held, but the organizing committee turned record television and sponsorship revenue into a net surplus that was used to maintain the facilities built for the olympics and develop the calgary region into the heart of canada's elite winter sports program. the five purpose-built venues continue to be used in their original functions, and have helped the country develop into one of the top nations in winter olympic competition; canada more than quintupled the five medals it won in calgary at the 2010 vancouver winter olympics.
the bid for the 1988 winter olympics was canada's seventh attempt at hosting a winter games and calgary's fourth.  previous bids representing montreal (1956) and vancouver (1976 and 1980) bookended failed attempts by the calgary olympic development association (coda) to host the 1964, 1968 and 1972 games.[2] the coda became dormant in 1966 after losing its bid for the 1972 olympics, but was revived in 1979 under the leadership of frank king to bid for the 1988 games.[3] calgary earned the right to bid on behalf of canada by the canadian olympic association (coa), defeating a rival challenge from a group representing vancouver.  the defeated organizing group lamented that they lost to calgary's "big-ticket games"; the calgary bid proposed to spend nearly three times what the vancouver group expected to pay to host the olympics.[4]
the coda then spent two years building local support for the project, selling memberships to 80,000 of the city's 600,000 residents.[1] it secured c$270 million in funding from the federal and provincial governments while civic leaders, including mayor ralph klein, crisscrossed the world attempting to woo international olympic committee (ioc) delegates.[3] driven by the arrival of the national hockey league's calgary flames, the city had already begun constructing an olympic coliseum (later named the olympic saddledome) prior to the ioc vote, an action that demonstrated calgary's determination to host the games and positively influenced delegates.[5] the city was one of three finalists, opposed by the swedish community of falun and cortina d'ampezzo, the italian town that hosted the 1956 winter olympics.[3] cortina d'ampezzo, along with milan, would get to host the 2026 winter olympics.[6]
the vote was held september 30, 1981, at baden-baden, west germany, during the 84th ioc session and 11th olympic congress. after cortina d'ampezzo was eliminated in the first round of balloting, calgary won the right to host the games over falun by a 48–31 vote.[1] the announcement of the coda's victory sent delegates in baden-baden and residents of calgary into celebration.[7] it was the first winter olympics awarded to canada, and the second games overall, following the 1976 summer olympics in montreal.[8]
it was bill pratt, the former contractor who took over as calgary organizing committee president in 1983, and who supervised the enormous construction project. says donald jacques, general manager of the calgary exhibition and stampede: "because of him, everything was built on time and on budget." but pratt rubbed many colleagues the wrong way. as a former co-worker predicted in 1983: "he will get everything built. there may not be many left around to enjoy it, but he'll get it done." his relations with the media were also difficult at times. he had barely settled into his job when the calgary press began criticizing the committee for excessive secrecy and for awarding olympic contracts to the calgary public relations firm of francis williams and johnson, where pratt had been a director, oco insisted there was no conflict of interest. declares pratt: "i have been nailed for a lot, but that does not bother me. the record stands."[10]
mcmahon stadium, calgary's primary outdoor facility, was the site of both the opening and closing ceremonies, the first time in 28 years that the same venue hosted both events.[11]  three other existing venues served as secondary facilities: the max bell centre hosted the demonstration events of curling and short track speed skating. the father david bauer olympic arena hosted some ice hockey matches, as did the stampede corral, which also played host to some figure skating events.[11] though the corral did not support the size of the international ice hockey federation (iihf)'s standard ice surface, the calgary organizing committee (olympiques calgary olympics '88 or oco'88) was able to convince the iihf to sanction the arena in exchange for a $1.2 million payment.[12]
the games' five primary venues were all purpose-built however, at significant cost.[13] the olympic saddledome was the primary venue for ice hockey and figure skating.  located at stampede park, the facility was expected to cost $83 million but cost overruns pushed the facility to nearly $100 million.[11] the olympic oval was built on the campus of the university of calgary. it was the first fully enclosed 400-metre speed skating venue in the world as it was necessary to protect against the possibility of either bitter cold temperatures or ice-melting chinook winds.[12] seven world and three olympic records were broken during the games, resulting in the facility earning praise as "the fastest ice on earth".[11] canada olympic park was built on the western outskirts of calgary and hosted bobsled, luge, ski jumping and freestyle skiing. it was the most expensive facility built for the games, costing $200 million.[11]
two facilities were built west of calgary, in the foothills of the rocky mountains.  the canmore nordic centre was 90-percent funded by the province of alberta at a cost of $17.3 million.  located near the community of canmore it was built with the intention that it would become a year-round recreation destination for albertans. the facility hosted cross-country skiing, biathlon and nordic combined events.[14] nakiska (cree for "to meet") was the most controversial facility built.[12] the province paid the $25 million construction cost for the alpine skiing facility on mount allen, about an hour west of calgary.[15] it was initially criticized for the location's relative lack of snow, requiring artificial snow making machines to be installed, and for an initial lack of technical difficulty.[12] international ski federation officials proposed modifications to the courses that ultimately met with praise from competitors.[16]
the calgary winter olympics were the first winter games to earn a significant television revenue base; where the 1980 lake placid games generated only us$20.7 million worldwide, oco'88 generated $324.9 million in broadcast rights.[17] the overwhelming majority of television revenues came from the american broadcasting company (abc), which agreed in 1984 to pay $309 million for american television rights, over three times the $91.5 million it paid for the 1984 winter olympics in sarajevo.[18] the deal, at the time the highest amount ever paid for a sporting event, allowed organizers to announce the games would be debt-free.[19] the ctv television network paid c$4.5 million for canadian rights and to act as the host broadcaster.[20] the games were also televised on cbc. while western european nations paid us$5.7 million combined.[21]
oco'88 made several alterations to the olympic program as part of efforts to ensure value for its broadcast partners. premier events, including ice hockey and figure skating, were scheduled for prime time and the games were lengthened to 16 days from the previous 12 to ensure three weekends of coverage.[22]  however, a significant downturn in advertising revenue for sporting events resulted in abc forecasting significant financial losses on the games.  calgary organizers appreciated their fortunate timing in signing the deal. king described the timing of the contract with abc as "the passing of the sun and the moon at the right time for calgary."[21] abc lost an estimated $60 million, and broadcast rights to the 1992 winter olympics were later sold to the cbs network for $243 million, a 20% reduction compared to calgary.[23]
a series of ticket-related scandals plagued the organizing committee as the games approached, resulting in widespread public anger.[24] demand for tickets was high, particularly for the premier events which had sold out a year in advance.  residents had been promised that only 10 percent of tickets would go to "olympic insiders", ioc officials and sponsors, but oco'88 was later forced to admit that up to 50 percent of seats to top events had gone to insiders.[12] the organizing committee, which was subsequently chastised by mayor klein for running a "closed shop", admitted that it had failed to properly communicate the obligations it had to supply ioc officials and sponsors with priority tickets.[25]  these events were preceded by oco'88's ticketing manager being charged with theft and fraud after he sent modified ticket request forms to americans that asked them to pay in united states funds rather than canadian and to return them to his company's post office box rather than that of the organizing committee.[26]
organizers attempted to respond to public concern by asking sponsors to consider reducing their orders and by paying $1.5 million to add 2,600 seats to the saddledome. king also noted that the calgary games offered a then-record 1.7 million tickets for sale, three times the amount available at sarajevo or lake placid, and that 82 percent of them were going to calgarians.[25] by their start, a winter games' record of over 1.4 million tickets had been sold,[27] a figure that eclipsed the previous three winter games combined.[28]
the city, which already had a strong volunteering tradition with the annual calgary stampede, also relied heavily on volunteers to run the olympics. over 22,000 people signed up to fill 9,400 positions, no matter how inglorious: doctors, lawyers and executives offered to clean manure dropped by horses at the opening ceremonies.[29] many residents participated in a "homestay" program, opening their homes to visitors from around the world and renting rooms to those who could not stay in a hotel.[12]
klein was among those who felt it necessary that the event be community driven, a decision which allowed the city's welcoming spirit to manifest.[30] the games' mascots, hidy and howdy, were designed to evoke images of "western hospitality".[31] the smiling, cowboy-themed polar bears were popular across canada. played by a team of students from bishop carroll high school, the sister-brother pair made up to 300 appearances per month in the lead up to the games.[32] from their introduction at the closing ceremonies of the sarajevo games in 1984 until their retirement at the conclusion of the calgary games, the pair made about 50,000 appearances.[33] the iconic mascots graced signs welcoming travelers to calgary for nearly two decades until they were replaced in 2007.[34]
held at a price of c$829 million, the calgary olympics cost more to stage than any previous games, summer or winter.[27] the high cost was anticipated, as organizers were aware at the outset of their bid that most facilities would have to be constructed.[4] the venues, constructed primarily with public money, were designed to have lasting use beyond the games and were planned to become the home of several of canada's national winter sports teams.[35]
the games were a major economic boon for the city which had fallen into its worst recession in 40 years following the collapse of both oil and grain prices in the mid-1980s.[28][36] a report prepared for the city in january 1985 estimated the games would create 11,100 man-years of employment and generate c$450-million in salaries and wages.[37] in its post-games report, oco'88 estimated the olympics created c$1.4 billion in economic benefits across canada during the 1980s, 70 percent within alberta, as a result of capital spending, increased tourism and new sporting opportunities created by the facilities.[38]
there were 46 events contested in 6 sports (10 disciplines).
the 1988 winter games began on february 13 with a $10 million opening ceremony that featured 5,500 performers,[39] an aerial flyover by the royal canadian air force's snowbirds,[40] the parade of nations and the release of 1,000 homing pigeons.[39] canadian composer david foster performed the instrumental theme song ("winter games") and its vocal counterpart ("can't you feel it?"),[41] while internationally recognized canadian folk/country musicians gordon lightfoot and ian tyson were among the featured performers.[42] governor general jeanne sauvé opened the games on behalf of queen elizabeth ii as an estimated 1.5 billion people watched the ceremony.[43][44]
the weather was a dominant story throughout much of the games, as strong chinook winds that brought daily temperatures as high as 17 °c (63 °f) wreaked havoc on the schedules for outdoor events. events were delayed when winds were deemed unsafe for competitors and organizers used artificial snow making equipment to ensure skiing venues were properly prepared.[45] it was the first time in olympic history that alpine events were held on artificial snow.[46] the games were also marred by the death of the austrian ski team's doctor, joerg oberhammer, on february 25 after a collision with another skier sent him crashing into a snow grooming machine at nakiska, crushing and killing him instantly. the incident was ruled an accident.[47]
the top individual competitors at the olympics were finnish ski jumper matti nykänen and dutch speed skater yvonne van gennip as they each won three gold medals.[46] italy's alberto tomba won gold in two skiing events, his first of five career olympic medals en route to becoming the first alpine skier to win medals at three winter games.[48] east germany's katarina witt defended her 1984 gold medal in women's figure skating, capturing a second gold in calgary.[48] her compatriot christa rothenburger won the gold medal in the 1000 metre race in speed skating, then went on to win a silver medal in the team sprint cycling event at the 1988 summer games to become the only person in olympic history to win medals at both olympic games in the same year.[46] the soviet union won gold in hockey as scandinavian neighbours finland and sweden took silver and bronze, respectively.[49]
as it had in 1976, canada again failed to win an official gold medal as the host of an olympic games.[50] canadians won two gold medals in demonstration events, including by sylvie daigle as one of her five medals in short-track speed skating.[51] canada's top official performances came in figure skating where brian orser and elizabeth manley each won silver medals.  promoted by the media as the "battle of the brians", the competition between orser and american rival brian boitano was the marquee event of the games.  boitano won the gold medal over orser by only one-tenth of a point.[52] manley was not viewed as a medal contender, but skated the greatest performance of her career to come within a fraction of witt's gold medal winning score.[48]
american speed skater dan jansen's personal tragedy was one of the more poignant events of the games as he skated the 500 metre race mere hours after his sister jane died of leukemia.[53] a gold medal favourite, jansen chose to compete as he felt it is what his sister would have wanted. viewers around the world witnessed his heartbreak as he fell and crashed into the outer wall in the first quarter of his heat.[54] in the 1000 metre race four days later, jansen was on a world record pace when he again fell.  after failing again in albertville, jansen finally won a gold medal at the 1994 lillehamer games.[55]
one of the most popular athletes from the games was british ski jumper eddie "the eagle" edwards, who gained infamy by placing last in both the 70 and 90 metre events finishing 70 and 53 points behind his next closest competitor, respectively.[48][56] edwards' "heroic failure" made him an instant celebrity; he went from earning £6,000 per year as a plasterer before the games to making £10,000 per hour per appearance afterward.[57] left embarrassed by the spectacle he created, the international ski federation altered the rules following calgary to eliminate each nation's right to send at least one athlete and set minimum competition standards for future events.[58] regardless, the president of the organizing committee, frank king, playfully saluted edwards' unorthodox sporting legacy, which would also be commemorated with a 2016 feature film, eddie the eagle.
the jamaican bobsleigh team, making their nation's winter olympic debut, was also popular in calgary.[48] the team was the brainchild of a pair of americans who recruited individuals with strong sprinting ability from the jamaican military to form the team.[59] dudley stokes and michael white finished the two-man event in 30th place out of 41 competitors and launched the jamaican team into worldwide fame.[48] the pair, along with devon harris and chris stokes, crashed in the four-man event, but were met with cheers from the crowd as they pushed their sled across the finish line.[59]  their odyssey was made into the 1993 movie cool runnings, a largely fictionalized comedy by walt disney pictures.[60]
a record 57 national olympic committees (nocs) entered athletes at the 1988 calgary olympics, 8 more than appeared at any previous olympic winter games.[61] 1,423 athletes participated in 46 events: 1,122 men and 301 women.[62] fiji,  guam, guatemala, jamaica, the netherlands antilles and the virgin islands had their winter olympics debut.

  *   host nation (canada)prior to calgary, the winter olympics were viewed as a second-rate event compared to their summer counterpart, so much so that the ioc had at one point considered eliminating them entirely.[22]  few cities bid on the winter games due to challenges faced in generating revenue.[63]  in its bid for the games, coda convinced the ioc that it could not only generate enough revenue to turn a profit, but enough of one to ensure a lasting legacy of winter sport development.[22] organizers followed the lead of their counterparts in los angeles for the 1984 summer olympics, attracting a large television contract in the united states and was the first host city to benefit from a change in the ioc's strategy on corporate sponsorship.[63] the calgary games attracted support from over two dozen major canadian and multinational corporations, generating millions of dollars in revenues.[20]
many program changes were made in calgary to grow the appeal of the winter games for sponsors: the extension to 16 days from 12 added an extra weekend of coverage, while the additional programming time was filled by television friendly demonstration events popular in canada. the exposure curling, freestyle skiing and short-track speed skating gained in calgary influenced the growth in their popularity and led to all three becoming full medal sports by 1998.[63]
hosting the games helped fuel a significant increase in calgary's reputation on the world stage.[30] crosbie cotton, a reporter for the calgary herald who covered the city's olympic odyssey from its bid to the closing ceremonies, noted a change in the attitude of the city's population over time. he believed that the populace began to outgrow its "giant inferiority complex" that is "typically canadian", replacing it with a new level of confidence as the games approached.[64] they helped the city grow from a regional oil and gas centre best known for the calgary stampede to a destination for international political, economic and sporting events.[30] a study prepared for the organizing committee of the 2010 vancouver olympics claimed that calgary hosted over 200 national and international sporting competitions between 1987 and 2007 due to the facilities it had constructed for the olympics.[65]
the games' enduring popularity within calgary has been attributed to efforts to make them "everybody's games".  aside from the sense of community fostered by the level of volunteer support, organizers included the public in other ways.  people were given opportunity to purchase a brick with their names engraved on it and used to build olympic plaza, where medal ceremonies were held in 1988. it remains a popular public park and event site in the city's downtown.[66]  members of the community have attempted to bring a second winter games to the city.  calgary offered to take over the 2002 winter olympics after a bribery scandal resulted in speculation that salt lake city would be unable to remain the host.[67]  the city also made an effort to bid for the 2010 games on canada's behalf, losing to vancouver.[68]  a 2013 calgary sun online poll found that 81% of respondents would support the city hosting a second olympics.[69] on november 13, 2018, the city of calgary held a public plebiscite on whether to bid to host the 2026 olympic and paralympic winter games. results of the plebiscite showed 171,750 or 56.4% of voters said no, and 132,832 or 43.6% said yes, with the city council concluding bid exploration efforts at a vote on november 19, 2018[70].
mindful of the financial disaster the montreal olympics became, oco'88 parlayed its ability to generate television and sponsorship revenues and government support into what was ultimately a c$170 million surplus.[22] (the claim of a surplus has frequently been challenged as oco'88 counted only its own revenues and expenses and did not include government funded facilities in its accounting.[71])  the surplus was turned into endowment funds split between canada olympic park ($110 million) and coda, which was reformed following the games to manage the olympic facilities with a trust fund that had subsequently grown to be worth over $200 million by 2013.[22] consequently, all five of the primary facilities built for the 1988 olympics remained operational in their original intended purpose 25 years after the games concluded.[72]
calgary and canmore became the heart of winter sport in canada as coda (now known as winsport canada) established itself as the nation's leader in developing elite athletes; in 2006, one-quarter of canada's olympic athletes were from the calgary region and three-quarters of its medalists were from or trained in alberta.[65] canada was not a winter sport power in 1988; the nation's five medals in calgary was its second best total at a winter olympics behind the seven it won at the 1932 lake placid games.[8] after 1988, canada won an increasing number of medals at each successive olympics,[73] culminating in a 26-medal performance in 2010 that included a winter olympic record of 14 gold medals, one more than the previous record holders soviet union (1976) and norway (2002).[74] in 2018 in pyeongchang, south korea, team canada earned its highest count of medals in the winter olympics with a total of 29 medals.[75]
notes
citations


the 1992 winter olympics, officially known as the xvi olympic winter games (french: les xvies jeux olympiques d'hiver), were a winter multi-sport event celebrated from 8 to 23 february 1992 in albertville, france. they were the last winter olympics to be held the same year as the summer olympics,[2][3] and the first where the winter paralympics were held at the same site. albertville was selected as host in 1986, beating sofia, falun, lillehammer, cortina d'ampezzo, anchorage and berchtesgaden. the games were the third winter olympics held in france, after chamonix in 1924 and grenoble in 1968, and the fifth olympics overall in the country.
only some of the skating and the opening and closing ceremonies took place in albertville, while the rest of the events took place in the villages of courchevel, la plagne, les arcs, les menuires, les saisies, méribel, pralognan-la-vanoise, tignes and val d'isère. sixty-four nations with 1,801 athletes participated in the games, including the unified team which represented non-baltic former soviet republics. germany participated as a unified team following reunification in 1990, while five newly independent european countries debuted, as did six "warm-weather" countries. short track speed skating, moguls and women's biathlon made their debut as an olympic sport. the games were the last winter games until 2014 to have demonstration sports, consisting of curling, aerials, ski ballet and speed skiing. it was the last olympics to have an outdoor speed skating rink. the games were succeeded by the 1992 winter paralympics from 25 march to 1 april.
norwegians won every male cross-country skiing race, with bjørn dæhlie and vegard ulvang both collecting three gold. ski jumper toni nieminen, 16, became the youngest male gold medalist of a winter olympic event. petra kronberger won both the combined event and the slalom, while bonnie blair won both the 500 m and 1000 m speed skating events and gunda niemann took both of the longest races. kim kihoon earned gold medals in both men's short track events. ye qiaobo of china won the country's first medal in the winter olympics, a silver in women's 500 metres speed skating. annelise coberger of new zealand won the southern hemisphere's first winter olympic medal—a silver in the women's slalom. nicolas bochatay was killed during a training session. germany won the most medals and the most gold.
the vote to select the host city of the 1992 winter olympics was conducted on 17 october 1986, in lausanne, switzerland, at the 91st ioc session. a record of seven different locales bid for these games.[4]
the 1992 olympic winter games marked the last time both the winter and summer games were held in the same year. the 1992 olympics also marks the last time france hosted the olympics. paris will host the 2024 summer olympics.
the oxford olympics study established the outturn cost of the albertville 1992 winter olympics at us$2.0 billion in 2015-dollars and cost overrun at 137% in real terms.[6] this includes sports-related costs only, that is, (i) operational costs incurred by the organizing committee for the purpose of staging the games, e.g., expenditures for technology, transportation, workforce, administration, security, catering, ceremonies, and medical services, and (ii) direct capital costs incurred by the host city and country or private investors to build, e.g., the competition venues, the olympic village, international broadcast center, and media and press center, which are required to host the games. indirect capital costs are not included, such as for road, rail, or airport infrastructure, or for hotel upgrades or other business investment incurred in preparation for the games but not directly related to staging the games. the cost and cost overrun for albertville 1992 compares with costs of us$2.5 billion and a cost overrun of 13% for vancouver 2010, and costs of us$51 billion and a cost overrun of 289% for sochi 2014,[7] the latter being the most costly olympics to date. average cost for winter games since 1960 is us$3.1 billion, average cost overrun is 142%.
magique (magic) was the olympic mascot of these games, and was a little imp in the shape of a star and a cube. it was created by philippe mairesse and was presented in 1989. his star shape symbolises dreams and imagination. his colours come from the french flag, with a red hat and a blue costume.
there were 57 events contested in 6 sports (12 disciplines). see the medal winners, ordered by sport:


this was the final time demonstration sports were included in the winter olympics programme.
a total of 64 nations sent athletes to compete in these games. with the collapse of the soviet union, six states chose to form a unified team, while the baltic states of estonia, latvia and lithuania had their own teams. croatia and slovenia, who were making their first appearance at the winter olympics, competed as independent nations after leaving yugoslavia. the un sanctions against yugoslavia that saw them miss the 1992 summer olympics had yet to come into effect.
the german team won most medals in the games, with a total of 10 gold medals, 10 silver and 6 bronze. it was the first time since the 1936 winter olympics that germany competed with a unified team after the reunification.
making their debuts were algeria, bermuda, brazil, honduras, ireland and swaziland (as well as the previously mentioned croatia and slovenia). it would also be the only appearance for both honduras and swaziland in winter olympics to date.
the 1992 games are (as of today) the last ones where the speed skating venue was outdoors.
(host nation is highlighted.)
(¹ combined team with athletes from 6 nations of the commonwealth of independent states; team only appeared in these winter olympics)
orf
ten australia
cbc
cctv
dr1
ebu, eurosport
yle
tf1, france 2, france 3
ard
zdf
rúv
rai
tvnz
nrk
tvr
svt1
srg ssr
bbc, itv
cbs sports,[8][9][10] turner sports[citation needed]
notes
citations

the 1994 winter olympics (norwegian: olympiske vinterleker 1994), officially known as the xvii olympic winter games, was a winter multi-sport event celebrated from 12 to 27 february 1994 in and around lillehammer, norway.
lillehammer failed to win the bid for the 1992 event, losing to albertville. lillehammer was awarded the 1994 winter olympics in 1988, after beating anchorage, united states; östersund, sweden; and sofia, bulgaria. lillehammer is the northernmost city to ever host the winter games and the olympic games overall. the games were the first to be held in a different year from the summer olympics, the first and only one to be held two years after the previous winter games. the games were the second winter olympics hosted in norway, after the 1952 winter olympics in oslo, and the fourth olympics in the nordic countries, after the 1912 summer olympics in stockholm, sweden, and the 1952 summer olympics in helsinki, finland.
although many events took place in lillehammer, skating took place in hamar, some ice hockey matches were placed in gjøvik, while alpine skiing was held in øyer and ringebu. sixty-seven countries and 1,737 athletes participated in six sports and sixty-one events.[1] fourteen countries made their debut in the winter olympics, of which nine were former soviet republics. the games also saw the introduction of stricter qualifying rules, reducing the number of under-performing participants from warm-weather countries. new events were two new distances in short track speed skating and aerials, while speed skating was moved indoors. nearly two million people spectated the games, which were the first to have the olympic truce in effect. the games were succeeded by the 1994 winter paralympics from 10 to 19 march.
manuela di centa and lyubov yegorova dominated women's cross-country skiing, taking five and four medals, respectively. a crowd of over 100,000 saw italy beat norway by 0.4 seconds on the men's 4 × 10 km relay. vreni schneider won a complete set of medals in alpine skiing, while norway took a medal sweep in the men's combined. nancy kerrigan had, before the games, been clubbed by tonya harding's associate, shane stant, but managed to take silver in ladies' singles. johann olav koss won three speed skating events, while 13-year-old kim yoon-mi became the youngest-ever olympic gold medalist. sweden beat canada in a dramatic penalty shootout in the ice hockey final. with 11 gold medals, russia won the most events, while with 26, norway collected the most medals overall.
planning of the lillehammer bid started in 1981, following falun, sweden's failed bid for the 1988 winter olympics, losing to calgary respectively. it was supported by the government largely to help stimulate the economy of the inland counties.[2] lillehammer originally bid for the 1992 games, but came fourth in the voting with the games ultimately awarded to albertville.[3] in 1986, the international olympic committee (ioc) voted to separate the summer and winter games, which had been held in the same year since the latter's inception in 1924, and arrange them in alternating even-numbered years.[4] a new bid was launched for the 1994 games, modified with an indoor speed skating venue and an additional ice hall in lillehammer. additional government guarantees were secured.[5]
three other locations bid for the games: östersund, anchorage, and sofia. the 94th ioc session, held in seoul on 15 september 1988, voted lillehammer the host for the games.[6] until the 2018 winter olympics, the lillehammer olympics were the last winter games to date to be held in a town, rather than be centered in a city.
the overall responsibility for the games was held by the lillehammer olympic organizing committee, which was created on 14 november 1988 and led by gerhard heiberg.[8] it was reorganized several times with various subsidiaries, but from 1993 consisted of a single company owned 51% by lillehammer municipality, 24.5% by the government of norway and 24.5% by the norwegian olympic committee.[9] the government had issued a guarantee for the games, and also covered the expenses related to infrastructure.[8] the total costs of the games was 7.4 billion norwegian krone (nok), of which nok 0.95 billion was expenditure by the ministries, nok 4.48 billion was for operations and event expenses, and nok 1.67 billion was for investments.[10] the games had a revenue of nok 2.71 billion, of which nok 1.43 billion was from television rights, nok 0.65 billion was from sponsors, and nok 0.15 billion was from ticket sales.[11]
production of the broadcasting, which costs nok 462 million,[12] was the responsibility of the norwegian broadcasting corporation (nrk), with assistance from the ctv television network (canada) (ctv) and the european broadcasting union (ebu).[13] nrk had 1,424 people working at the olympics, while international broadcasters sent an additional 4,050 accredited broadcasting personnel. the transmission rights for the games were held by ebu in europe, cbs in the united states, nhk in japan, ctv in canada, the asia-pacific broadcasting union, nine network in australia, as well as other broadcasters in other countries. the total transmission rights price was 350 million united states dollars.[14] in part because of the harding–kerrigan affair, the viewship in the united states is still the highest ever for winter olympics.[15]
nok 460 million was used on information technology,[16] with the main system running on an ibm as/400.[17] 3,500 terminals were in use during the game based on the info '94 system; it was the first olympics to have terminals installed abroad.[16] seiko delivered the time-keeping devices.[18] telecommunications were delivered by norwegian telecom, including signal transmission.[19] this included a mobile radio network with nine base stations.[20]
as part of its promotional activities, the organizing committee illegally used the art work the smile machine leading to an international incident between its creator and the norwegian embassy in washington, dc.
the oxford olympics study established the outturn cost of the lillehammer 1994 winter olympics at us$2.2 billion in 2015-dollars and cost overrun at 277% in real terms.[21] this includes sports-related costs only, that is, (i) operational costs incurred by the organizing committee for the purpose of staging the games, e.g., expenditures for technology, transportation, workforce, administration, security, catering, ceremonies, and medical services, and (ii) direct capital costs incurred by the host city and country or private investors to build, e.g., the competition venues, the olympic village, international broadcast center, and media and press center, which are required to host the games. indirect capital costs are not included, such as for road, rail, or airport infrastructure, or for hotel upgrades or other business investment incurred in preparation for the games but not directly related to staging the games. the cost and cost overrun for lillehammer 1994 compares with costs of us$2.5 billion and a cost overrun of 13% for vancouver 2010, and costs of us$51[22] billion and a cost overrun of 289% for sochi 2014, the latter being the most costly olympics to date. average cost for winter games since 1960 is us$3.1 billion, average cost overrun is 142%.
there were 61 events contested in 6 sports (12 disciplines).
the opening ceremony was held at the ski jumping hill lysgårdsbakken. artistic content was made to present a range of norwegian culture, included sami joik, telemark skiing, fiddlers and folk dancing,[23] simulations of traditional weddings and their processions, and vetter from norse mythology.[24] after speeches by heiberg and ioc president juan antonio samaranch, the games were officially declared opened by king harald v.[25] the olympic flame was to be skied down the skijump before lighting the cauldron. originally this task had rested upon ole gunnar fidjestøl, but after he was injured in a practice jump, his back-up stein gruben received the honor. the cauldron was lit by crown prince haakon magnus. the olympic oaths were issued by vegard ulvang for the athletes and kari kåring for the officials.[26]
since the 1992 games, the rules for combined changed, where the winner was determined by total time instead of points. the women's downhill was originally scheduled for hafjell, but after protests it was moved to kvitfjell, which also hosted the men's downhill and super-g. in the men's events, germany's markus wasmeier won two disciplines, giant slalom and super-g, finishing ahead of the united states's tommy moe on the super-g. moe won the downhill ahead of norway's kjetil andré aamodt, who came in third in the super-g. austria's thomas stangassinger won the slalom ahead of italy's alberto tomba. in the combined, norway took a medal sweep, with lasse kjus winning ahead of aamodt and harald christian strand nilsen.[27]
in the women's events, switzerland's vreni schneider was the most successful, winning the slalom, taking silver in combined and taking bronze in giant slalom. the only other athlete to take multiple medals was italy's isolde kostner, who took a third place in both downhill and super-g. the downhill was won by germany's katja seizinger, super-g by the united states' diann roffe, the giant slalom by italy's deborah compagnoni, and the combined by sweden's pernilla wiberg.[27]
russia and germany split all the individual men's medals. in the 10 km sprint, russia's sergei tchepikov won ahead of ricco groß, both with a clean sheet.[28] bronze winner sergei tarasov won the 20 km individual ahead of germany's frank luck and sven fischer.[29] germany easily revenged itself by winning the 4 × 7.5 km relay ahead of russia and france.[30] in the women's class, canada's myriam bédard won both the individual events, finishing ahead of belarus' svetlana paramygina on the 7.5 km sprint and ahead of france's anne briand on the 15 km individual.[29] in the 4 × 7.5 km relay, the format since 1992 was changed from three to four participants. russia, with a clean sheet, won ahead of germany, who made six misses, with france taking the bronze.[31]
in two-man, switzerland took the top two places, with gustav weder, donat acklin winning 0.05 seconds ahead of reto götschi and guido acklin, who were again 0.15 seconds ahead of italy's günther huber and stefano ticci placing third.[32] in four-man, germany-ii, consisting of harald czudaj, karsten brannasch, olaf hampel and alexander szelig, finished 0.06 seconds ahead of switzerland-i and 0.23 ahead of germany-i.[33]
participants from five countries took all the medals of the ten events. starting in 1994, the olympics alternated which of the medium-distance and long-distance races had classical and freestyle. men's 4 × 10 km relay was watched by a crowd of nearly 150,000. norway, italy and finland followed each other tightly for three and a half rounds, with the second and third exchange of the three talking place within 1.1 seconds of each other. finland fell behind in the end, and norwegian bjørn dæhlie and italian silvio fauner battled to the end, with italy beating norway by 0.4 seconds.[34] dæhlie won the 10 km classical and 15 km pursuit, while taking silver in the 30 km freestyle. kazakhstan's vladimir smirnov won the 50 km classical, in addition to silver in the 10 km and the 15 km. norway's thomas alsgaard won the 30 km, while finland's mika myllylä took an individual silver and a bronze.[35]
italy's manuela di centa and russia's lyubov yegorova dominated the women's events. they took five and four medals each, respectively, and between them winning all the races. yegorova finished ahead of di centa on the 5 km classical and the 10 km pursuit, while di centa finished ahead of yegorova on the 15 km freestyle, and also won the 30 km classical ahead of norway's marit wold. finland's marja-liisa kirvesniemi took two bronze medals, in 5 km and 30 km.[35] in the 4 × 5 km relay, norway and russia kept up with each other until the final stage, in which anita moen lost to yegorova, with italy finishing third. with yegorova's sixth career gold, she was tied as the most-winning winter olympic participant.[36]
on 6 january, tonya harding's ex-husband, jeff gillooly, conspired with shane stant to club fellow female figure skater nancy kerrigan in the knee.[37] both harding and kerrigan were selected for the olympic team. after harding admitted to helping to cover up the attack, the united states olympic committee initiated proceedings to remove her from the olympic team, but harding retained her place after threatening legal action.[38] in the ladies' singles, ukraine's oksana baiul won ahead of kerrigan and chen lu, with harding finishing eighth.[39] in the men's singles, russia's alexei urmanov won ahead of canada's elvis stojko and france's philippe candeloro.[40] relaxation of the amateurism rules led to several former stars returning, such as ice dancing 1984 champions great britain's jayne torvill and christopher dean, who took a bronze behind russians oksana grishuk and evgeny platov, and maya usova and alexander zhulin.[41] in pair skating, the russians also took a double, with ekaterina gordeeva and sergei grinkov winning ahead of natalia mishkutenok and artur dmitriev.[42]
aerials was added as a discipline, after it had been a demonstration sport at the previous two games. ski ballet, which had been a demonstration sport in 1992, was dropped.[43] canada dominated the men's events, with jean-luc brassard winning the men's moguls ahead of russian sergey shupletsov.[44] in the men's aerials, switzerlands's andreas schönbächler won ahead of canada's philippe laroche and lloyd langlois, with canadians also claiming the fourth and sixth places.[45] in the women's disciplines, norway was the only nation to take two medals; stine lise hattestad won the moguls ahead of the united states' liz mcintyre.[46] in the aerials, lina cheryazova won, claiming uzbekistan's only medal,[47] ahead of sweden's marie lindgren and norway's hilde synnøve lid.[48]
twelve teams participated in the ice hockey tournament, divided into two groups. each played as a single round robin, with the four best advancing to the single elimination medal tournament.[49] group a saw finland win all five matches, while the host nation lost all theirs. also germany, the czech republic and russia advanced from the group, all with three victories. group b was won by slovakia ahead of canada, sweden and the united states.[50] the quarter-finals saw the czech republic, the united states, germany and slovakia eliminated.[51] in the semi-finals, canada beat finland 5–3, while sweden beat russia 4–3.[52] after the final period of the final, the match was a 2–2 tie, resulting in a shoot-out. after six shots, it was tied 2–2 until sweden's peter forsberg beat corey hirsch, making the swedes win after paul kariya missed his shot. this led to tomas jonsson, håkan loob and mats näslund becoming the first three members of the triple gold club.[53]
italy, germany and austria collected all the medals in the luge events. germany's georg hackl won the men's singles, making him the first to defend an olympic title in the event in thirty years. he finished ahead of austria's markus prock and italy's armin zöggeler. in the doubles, the two italian teams finished on top, with kurt brugger and wilfried huber winning ahead of hansjörg raffl and norbert huber. in the women's singles, italy's gerda weissensteiner won ahead of germany's susi erdmann and austria's andrea tagwerker.[54] the own debuts was start nedžad lomigora from bosnia and herzegovina, marco feder from liechtenstein, sminon j. payne from bermuda, paul hix from united kingdom, josef svarek from slovakia, roger white from australia.
although the events were the same, since the 1992 games there was a rule change so that instead of jumping three times and taking the points for the best two, the competitors only jumped twice. in the individual normal hill/15 km, japan's kenji ogiwara had only lost a single event in the season's world cup, but came in sixth on the hill, which was won by norway's fred børre lundberg. he won the event after finishing eight-best in the skiing, ahead of japan's takanori kono, norway's bjarte engen vik and ogiwara in fourth.[55] in the team normal hill/3 x 10 km, japan finished first, third and fifth among the jumpers, giving them a 5:07 minute lead over norway and finishing 4:49 minutes ahead. switzerland took the bronze.[56]
short track speed skating was dominated by south korea, who won four of the six events. after the discipline's debut in 1992, 1994 featured two new events, the men's 500 meters and the women's 1000 meters.[57] south korea's chae ji-hoon won the men's 500 meters, while taking silver on the 1000 meters behind countryman kim ki-hoon, who defended his 1992 gold. the bronze was won by canada's marc gagnon, who won the b final. in the a final, countryman derrick campbell was obstructed by great britain's nicky gooch, who was disqualified. campbell got up and started celebrating his bronze medal, when he discovered he had not completed the race.[58]
in the men's 5000 meter relay, south korea did not enter after a fall in the sole qualifying event, which took place in march 1993. canada fell during the final, which saw italy take a clear victory ahead of the united states, who were marginally ahead of australia. the united states' eric flaim became the first to take olympic medals in both short track and long track speed skating, while australia took its first winter olympic medal ever.[59] six people took the individual medals in the women's events, with the united states' cathy turner defending her 1992 gold on the 500 meters[60] and south korea's chun lee-kyung taking the gold in 1000 meters.[57] south korea won the 3000 meter relay with a team of four girls under 19. at 13, kim yoon-mi became the world's youngest olympic gold medalist.[61]
norway won three of the six individual medals, with norway's espen bredesen winning the normal hill ahead of norway's lasse ottesen and germany's dieter thoma. in the large hill, germany's jens weißflog won ahead of bredesen and austria's andreas goldberger.[62] in the
large hill team, the 1994 games introduced new rules whereby all four jumps in each round counted, and not just the best three. neither norway nor finland, who between them had won all but one former olympic team jump, managed to collect a medal. the event became a duel between germany and japan, with only a point separating them after the first round of jumps. masahiko harada had the last jump, and would secure a gold if he managed 105 meters but lost his 'cool' mistiming his leap and landed at 97.5 meters, giving the gold to the germans.[63]
the long track speed skating events moved indoors, after they had been held outdoors in 1992. the 1994 games introduced new qualification rules, limiting the number of participants in the men's 5000 meters and women's 3000 meters to 32, and only allowing the 16 best in each of these events to participate in the men's 10000 meters and the women's 5000 meters. norway's johann olav koss took three golds, in the men's 1,500 meters, 5000 meters and 10000 meters. in the latter two, he finished ahead of fellow countryman kjell storelid. the men's 500 meters was won by russia's aleksandr golubev ahead of fellow countryman sergey klevchenya, while the men's 1000 meters was won by american dan jansen. for women, american bonnie blair defended her two 1992 golds in 500 meters and 1000 meters. austria's emese hunyady won the 1500 meters ahead of russia's svetlana bazhanova and germany's gunda niemann. however, bazhanova took gold ahead of nemeth-hunyady on the 3000 meters, with germany's claudia pechstein in third. pechstein would go on to win the 5000 meters ahead of niemann.[64]
at the closing ceremonies, also held at lysgårdsbakken, all spectators were handed a flashlight with the inscription "remember sarajevo"—the host of the 1984 winter olympics which was at the heart of the bosnian war. the first entrants on the stage were liv ullmann and thor heyerdahl,[65] followed by the athletes' precession. after the flag had been transferred to nagano mayor tasuka tsukada, speeches were held by lillehammer mayor audun tron, heiberg and samaranch. the latter used his speech to remind about sarajevo's situation,[66] before giving heiberg ioc's gold medal.[67] artistic presentations followed with many of the themes from the opening ceremony. the 1998 winter games' mascots, snowlets, was also presented. of the 2,200 people performing in the opening and closing ceremonies, only 50 were professionals.[68]
the vi winter paralympics were run as an independent tournament, but organized by looc from 10 to 19 march. competitions were held in alpine skiing, ice sledge speed racing, biathlon and cross-country skiing; the games also introduced ice sledge hockey. the paralympics used the same venues as the olympics, and were the second in norway, after the 1980 winter paralympics in geilo. 471 athletes from 31 countries participated, with norway claiming the most gold medals ahead of germany. the paralympics featured their own logo, the amputee mascot sondre, but retained the same overall design as the olympics.[69]
the games were spread out over ten venues in five municipalities in two counties, oppland and hedmark. lillehammer, with 25,000 inhabitants, and hamar and gjøvik, both with 27,000 inhabitants, are all situated on the lake mjøsa. gjøvik and hamar are located 45 and 54 kilometers (28 and 34 mi) south of lillehammer. hunderfossen is located 15 kilometers (9.3 mi) north of lillehammer, but lies within the municipality. øyer and ringebu, both with just under 5,000 inhabitants, are located 18 and 50 kilometers (11 and 31 mi) north of lillehammer, in the valley gudbrandsdalen. lillehammer had four venues, hamar had two venues, while hunderfossen, gjøvik, øyer and ringebu had one venue each.[70]
in lillehammer, lysgårdsbakken features twin ski jumping hills. the large hill has a hill size of 138 and a critical point of 120, while the normal hill has a hill size of 100 and a critical point of 90. the hill has capacity for 35,000 spectators and hosted, in addition to the ski jumping events, the opening and closing ceremonies.[71] birkebeineren skistadion featured cross-country skiing and biathlon, with the stadium itself having a capacity for 31,000 spectators during cross-country skiing and 13,500 during biathlon. in addition, spectators could watch from along the tracks.[72] kanthugen freestyle arena featured a capacity for 15,000 spectators.[73] all the outdoor skiing arenas had free areas, which saw up to 25,000 extra spectators at the team jump and 75,000 extra spectators at the 50 km.[74]
lillehammer olympic bobsleigh and luge track is located at hunderfossen. it had a capacity for 10,000 spectators and is the only bobsleigh and luge track in the nordic countries.[75] ice hockey was played at two venues, in håkons hall in lillehammer and gjøvik olympic cavern hall in gjøvik. håkons hall has a capacity for 10,500 spectators, and also features the norwegian olympic museum. the cavern hall is built as a man-made cave and had a capacity for 5,300 spectators.[76][77] skating events took place at two venues in hamar. vikingskipet had a capacity for 10,600 spectators and featured speed skating events,[78] while figure skating and short-track speed skating were held at hamar olympic amphitheatre.[79] alpine skiing was split between two ski resorts: hafjell in øyer and kvitfjell in ringebu. the former was used for the slalom and giant slalom, while the latter hosted downhill and super-g.[80]
spectators relied heavily on the use of buses and trains for transportation. downtown lillehammer and the axis between lillehammer and oslo were the most limiting areas, and the norwegian state railways ran up to 22 trains per day between oslo and lillehammer. trains were also used northwards towards trondheim, while other areas were served by bus. all the venues were located along railway lines, making use of spectators walking from the stations to the venues to limit road congestion, although special services were available for disabled people. shuttle buses were established between venues and also connected to park and ride facilities.[81]
a record 67 nations participated in the 1994 winter olympic games. the games were the first following the implementation of stricter qualifying standards, which prevented low-performing athletes from competing without meeting minimum standards. as a consequence, eleven "warm-weather countries" signed up to participate in the games, but were ultimately absent as none of their athletes succeeded in qualifying. the number of african athletes fell from nineteen in 1992 to three in 1994. these rules were, however, not applied to bobsled events, enabling the united states virgin islands, monaco, trinidad and tobago and jamaica to compete in that sport.[82] on 25 october 1993, the united nations general assembly urged its members to observe the olympic truce from seven days before to seven days after the olympic games, making the lillehammer games the first to observe the truce.[83] ioc appealed for a truce in the ongoing bosnian war and the siege of sarajevo, the city that had hosted the 1984 winter olympics.[84]
the nine former soviet republics of armenia, belarus, georgia, kazakhstan, kyrgyzstan, moldova, russia, ukraine and uzbekistan participated as independent nations. the break-up of czechoslovakia resulted in the czech republic and slovakia participating for the first time. bosnia and herzegovina participated for the first time, after their independence from yugoslavia. the composition of the bosnia and herzegovina four-man bob team was one croat, two bosniaks and a serb, mirroring the ethnic diversity of the country. three "warm countries", american samoa, israel and trinidad and tobago, made their debuts.


russia won the most golds, while norway won the most medals overall. the following table presents the top ten nations, sorted by gold medals, with the host nation highlighted.[47]
orf
network ten,
nine network
dr1
ctv
cctv
ebu
eurosport
yle
tf1
ard
zdf
rúv
rai
nos
tvnz
nrk
srg srr
svt
bbc
cbs sports, turner sports

the 1998 winter olympics, officially the xviii olympic winter games (french: les xviiies jeux olympiques d'hiver)[1] (japanese: 第十八回オリンピック冬季競技大会, dai jūhachi-kai orinpikku tōkikyōgi taikai), and commonly known as nagano 1998, was a winter multi-sport event celebrated from 7 to 22 february 1998 that were centered in nagano, japan. the games also took place in the nearby mountain communities of hakuba, karuizawa, nozawa onsen, and yamanouuchi. the city of nagano had previously been a candidate to host the 1940 winter olympics (which were later cancelled), as well as the 1972 winter olympics, but each time nagano was eliminated at the national level by sapporo.
the games hosted 2,176 athletes from 72 nations competing in 7 sports and 68 events.[2] the number of athletes and participating nations were a record at the time. the games saw the introduction of women's ice hockey, curling and snowboarding. national hockey league players were allowed to participate in the men's ice hockey for the first time. five countries, azerbaijan, kenya, macedonia, uruguay, and venezuela made their debut at the winter olympics.
the athlete who won the most medals at these games was the russian cross-country skier larisa lazutina who won five medals, including three gold. the norwegian cross-country skier bjørn dæhlie won four medals, including three gold, which took his total olympic medal total to 12, including eight gold, which is a record for winter olympics. in ice hockey, professionals from the north american national hockey league participated for the first time. despite their participation, the czech men's ice hockey team won the gold medal. in ski jumping, kazuyoshi funaki won two gold medals and one silver for host japan. the american figure skater tara lipinski became the youngest champion in olympic history at the age of 15 years and 255 days. germany dominated the medal table with 29 medals, including 12 gold. germany was followed by norway and russia, who won 25 and 18 medals respectively. canada, which finished fourth in the medal table with 15 medals, including six gold, had its most successful winter olympics up until that point.
the host was selected on 15 june 1991, over salt lake city, östersund, jaca and aosta. they were the third olympic games and second winter olympics to be held in japan, after the 1964 summer olympics in tokyo and the 1972 winter olympics in sapporo. the games were succeeded by the 1998 winter paralympics from 5 to 14 march. these were the final winter olympic games under the ioc presidency of juan antonio samaranch.
the hosting of the games improved transportation networks with the construction of the high-speed shinkansen, the nagano shinkansen, now the hokuriku shinkansen, between tokyo and nagano station, via ōmiya and takasaki. in addition, new highways were built, including the nagano expressway and the jōshin-etsu expressway and upgrades were made to existing roads.[3]
in 1932, japan won the rights to host the 1940 summer olympics in tokyo. at that time, organizers of the summer olympics had priority in choosing the venue for the winter olympics the same year.[a 1] several japanese cities, including nagano, prepared a bid. sapporo was chosen; however, the games never took place because of world war ii.[a 2] in 1961, nagano declared its intention to host the 1968 winter olympics but lost to sapporo, the winning japanese bid, who lost to grenoble, france, and sapporo eventually won the right to host the 1972 winter olympics.[a 3]
japanese private sector organizations, in 1983, began publicly discussing a possible bid.[a 4] two years later, in 1985, the nagano prefectural assembly, decided to begin the process to bid, for its third time, for a winter olympics.[a 5] the bid committee was established in july 1986, they submitted their bid to the japanese olympic committee (joc) in november of the same year. other japanese cities that were bidding were asahikawa, yamagata, and morioka.[a 6] 1 june 1988, the joc selected nagano in the first round of national voting, receiving 34 of 45 votes.[a 7] in 1989, the bid committee was reorganized, with the japanese prime minister as head of the committee. the number of committee members was 511.[a 8]
on 12 february 1990, the bid delegation presented its candidature at the ioc in lausanne before juan antonio samaranch.[a 9] other candidate cities for the 1998 olympics were aosta, italy; jaca, spain; östersund, sweden; salt lake city, united states, and sochi, soviet union (now russia.[a 10] the host city selection was held in birmingham, united kingdom, on 15 june 1991, at the 97th ioc session.[a 11] after the first round of voting, nagano led, with aosta and salt lake city tied for last. aosta was eliminated in a run-off against salt lake city. after the second round of voting, nagano led with salt lake city in second, and jaca was eliminated. following round 3, nagano continued to lead, with salt lake city in second, and östersund was eliminated. finally, nagano prevailed over salt lake city by just 4 votes in the fifth round of voting, becoming the third japanese city to host the games after tokyo in 1964 summer olympics and sapporo in 1972.[a 12] nagano, at 36°n, is the southernmost city in the northern hemisphere to host the winter olympics (1960 winter olympics host squaw valley, california is 39°n).[a 13] in june 1995, salt lake was chosen as the host of the following 2002 winter olympics.
following a 2002 winter olympic bribery corruption scandal that erupted in the summer of 2000, atlanta, host of the 1996 summer olympics, nagano, and sydney, host of the 2000 summer olympics, were suspected of similar improprieties in bidding practices[4] the nagano olympic bid committee spent approximately $14 million to entertain the 62 international olympic committee members and many of their companions. the precise figures are unknown since nagano, after the ioc asked that the entertainment expenditures not be made public, destroyed the financial records.[5][6]
five months after the city was selected, the nagano olympic organizing committee (naoc) was created. eishiro saito, chairman of japan business federation (keidanren) was selected as president of the committee. there were four vice presidents: goro yoshimura, the governor of nagano prefecture; hironoshin furuhashi, president of the japanese olympic committee; yoshiaki tsutsumi, the president of the ski association of japan; and tasuku tsukada, the mayor of nagano city.[a 14] in addition, the vice minister of the ministry of home affairs, tadashi tsuda, served as director-general.[a 15] tsuda was replaced by makoto kobayashi in 1993.[a 16]
the organizing committee recognized three goals for the games, which they referred to as "games from the heart": promote youth participation, coexistence with nature, create a festival with peace and friendship at its centre.[a 17] to realize the first goal, a camp bringing together 217 young people from 51 countries was created, along with the program of "one school, one country" in nagano prefecture.[a 18] this program organized cultural exchanges with other countries. in addition, more than 100,000 tickets were reserved for children.[a 19] for the second point, the organizers attempted to minimize the impact on their nature and the local ecosystem.[a 20] regarding the third point, an international truce organized by the united nations in 1997 was adopted during the games.[a 21]
the nagano olympics games are a link to the 21st century, inspiring our search for wisdom for the new ear, respect for the beauty and bounty of nature, furtherance of peace and goodwill. friends worldwide are welcome to share, in the spirit of competition and fair play, the joys and glory of the xviii olympic winter games.[a 22]
in june 1998, four months after the games, the naoc presented a gift of us$1 million to the olympic museum in lausanne.[a 23] in october of the same year, naoc donated a 3-d high vision theater system to the olympic museum.[a 24]
in february 1999, one year after the games, the ioc awarded the nagano the olympic cup, and presented the city a sculpture of stylized athletes raising the olympic flag by the swiss artist nag arnoldi.[b 1]
the costs of construction and of the land of the olympic venues totaled 106.6 billion yen,[a 25] approximately 914 million us dollars. of this, the japanese national government spent 51.1 billion, the nagano prefectural government spent 29.6 billion, and the cities and towns of nagano, 23.4 billion; hakuba, 1 billion; and nozawa onsen, 1.1 billion; shared the remaining 25.5 billion.[a 26] the most expensive venue was m-wave, which hosted the long-track speed skating events. it cost 34.8 billion.[a 27] the two ice hockey venues, big hat and aqua wing arena cost 19.1 and 9.1 billion respectively.[a 28] the white ring (arena), which hosted figure skating and short-track speed skating cost 14.2 billion, the spiral, which hosted bobsleigh, luge, and skeleton, cost 10.1 billion.[a 29] another 8.6 billion was spent on the hakuba ski jumping stadium, 7 billion for snow harp – the cross-country skiing venue, and 3 billion for the biathlon venue at nozawa onsen snow resort.[a 30]
the organizing committee financed all costs, totaling 113.9 billion yen.[a 31] it spent 99.4 billion for operational expenses, 21.6 billion for public relations, 20.7 billion for installations, 18.4 billion for telecommunications, 15.9 billion for running the competitions, and 14.4 billion for administration.[a 32] television rights were worth 35.4 billion, and marketing earned 31.3 billion.[a 33] ticket sales were worth 10.5 billion.[a 34] the total cost of the nagano games is estimated to have been us$15.25 billion (in 2015), of which the largest factor in the cost of the games was the extension of the shinkansen to nagano. this compares, for example, with us$2.5 billion for the 2002 winter olympics, us$4.35 billion for the 2006 winter olympics, us$7.56 billion for the 2010 winter olympics, and us$51 billion for the 2014 winter olympics[8]
nagano is situated in a mountainous area of japan that receives large snowfalls. these combined to make transportation an important challenge for the organizing committee. in addition, the olympic village was a distance of 7 kilometers from the center of the city, and sporting events were spread over five surrounding communities. complicating matters is that many of the venues had one single road in-out, which limited possibilities and led to traffic jams.[a 35]
to improve access to nagano, the government decided to link nagano with the high-speed shinkansen train network. the nagano shinkansen, now the hokuriku shinkansen was inaugurated five months before the start of the games. this reduced by half the travel time between tokyo and nagano, to 79 minutes for 221 kilometers.[a 36] the length of the track between takasaki station and nagano station is 125.7 km, which includes 63.4 km of tunnels. the high speed train network carried 655,000 passengers during the games.[b 2]
two highways, the nagano expressway and the jōshin-etsu expressway, were also built in the nagano region.[b 3] in may 1993, the 75.8-kilometer section of the nagano expressway was completed, and in october 1997, the 111.4 kilometer section of the jōshin-etsu expressway was completed.[b 4] in addition, another 114.9 kilometers of roads within nagano prefecture were improved.[3]
transportation systems for the games ran for 33 days, from the opening of the athletes village until 25, 3 february days after the closing ceremony. approximately 64% of the athletes arrived between 1 and 6 february, and 74% left nagano between 22 and 25 february.[a 37] transportation operations were directed from a transportation centre situated at the center of the organizing committee. two regional transportation hubs were created in hakuba and yamanouchi, as well as a traffic center for vehicles in karuizawa.[a 38] the media, as well as representatives of different national olympic committees generally were transported by car, from their arrival airport, usually tokyo but also kansai and nagoya, to their lodging, either in nagano or karuizawa.[a 39] the members of the ioc traveled by shinkansen.[a 40]
to improve transportation for spectators, the number and hours of local trains were extended.[a 41] during the heaviest traffic days, more cars were put in service and up to 68 parking areas, for 8,000 vehicles were at available for various olympic delegations, and another 17 parking areas for 23,000 cars for spectators. approximately 1,200 vehicles had navigation systems which transmitted their locations in real time.[a 42]
as one of the principal aims of the games was to respect nature, many vehicles were considered ecological or semi-ecological. in addition, there were more than 100 electric vehicles, hybrid mini-buses and other environmentally-friendly vehicles.[a 43]
the emblem of the 1998 winter olympics consisted of a stylized snow flower with each petal representing an athlete participating in a winter sport. the figure could also represent a snowflake, or a mountain flower, which refers to the importance of the natural environment to the city of nagano. similarly, tokyo used cherry blossoms in its logo for its candidature for the 2020 summer olympics.
landor associates conceived the official mascots that were used by the communication team for the games. they consisted of four owlets, sukki, nokki, lekki and tsukki, also called snowlets. the names were chosen from more than 47,000 suggestions. four represents the number of years between each olympic games, and also represent the four elements, fire, are, earth, and water.
the official poster for the games was designed by the graphic designer masuteru aoba presented a thrush perched on ski poles with light in the background shining on snow-capped mountain peaks. here, as with the emblem and the mascots, the importance of the natural environment in these olympic games and a desire to create harmony between athletes and the natural surroundings are shown. in addition to the official poster, a separate posted was created for the opening ceremony.[a 44] marketing for the games cost the organizing committee 5.9 billion yen.[a 45]
these olympic games were sponsored by 11 worldwide partners, 8 gold partners, and 18 official supports and suppliers. marketing revenues for sponsoring or for the rights to use the emblems and mascots of the games totaled 31.3 billion yen.[a 46]
sukki, nokki, lekki and tsukki, also known as the snowlets are the 1998 winter olympic mascots and are four snowy owls. they represent respectively fire (sukki), air (nokki), earth (lekki) and water (tsukki) and together they represent the four major islands of japan.
the development of rights packages were based on ioc policy of offering exclusive rights to a limited number of companies, with one company allowed to purchase the rights for any single product or service category, and these were based on previous games, with adaptations for the local market.[a 47] sponsors were permitted to use the emblem and mascots as long as consent was obtained from the ioc, joc, and the naoc.[a 48] hospitality packages for sponsors included priority for accommodations, tickets, and transportation services.[a 49] the sponsor hospitality village, next to the nagano olympic stadium, welcomed 32,000 guests.[a 50]
to promote awareness of the sponsors, advertising was done in various media from 1995, and on banners and buses immediately before the games.[a 51] dick pound noted, during the games, the excellence of the marketing program, citing the "perfect example of how the private and public sectors can work together".[a 52]
the games had 11 worldwide olympic partners, eight gold sponsors and 18 official supporters and suppliers.[a 53]
from 7 february 1997, the organizing committee put up for sale 1,286,000 tickets for the various competitions and ceremonies. the number of tickets sold was 1,149,615, which represented 89.4% of available tickets. including people connected to the games, the total number of spectators was 1,275,529. this number was slightly higher than in 1994 but slightly lower than the 1988 winter olympics in calgary. tickets sales were a success in japan with a reservation list of 6 million. for the most popular sports, a lottery was used.[a 54] in total, ticket sales raised 10.5 billion yen for the organizing committee.[a 55]
the ice hockey matches represented 295,802 tickets sold, 26% of the total. tickets sold for alpine skiing totaled 166,092; for ski jumping, 96,000, and speed skating, 93,000. for multiple sports, ski jumping, nordic combined jumps, freestyle skiing, all three skating disciplines, bobsleigh, and curling, as well as the ceremonies, all tickets were sold. by contrast, only 56.6% of the 146,000 available tickets for cross-country skiing were sold.[a 56]
the oxford olympics study established the outturn cost of the nagano 1998 winter olympics at us$2.2 billion in 2015-dollars and cost overrun at 56% in real terms.[9] this includes sports-related costs only, that is, (i) operational costs incurred by the organizing committee for the purpose of staging the games, e.g., expenditures for technology, transportation, workforce, administration, security, catering, ceremonies, and medical services, and (ii) direct capital costs incurred by the host city and country or private investors to build, e.g., the competition venues, the olympic village, international broadcast center, and media and press center, which are required to host the games. indirect capital costs are not included, such as for road, rail, or airport infrastructure, or for hotel upgrades or other business investment incurred in preparation for the games but not directly related to staging the games. the cost and cost overrun for nagano 1998 compares with costs of us$2.5 billion and a cost overrun of 13% for vancouver 2010, and costs of us$51[10] billion and a cost overrun of 289% for sochi 2014, the latter being the most costly olympics to date. average cost for winter games since 1960 is us$3.1 billion, average cost overrun is 142%.
for the 1998 winter olympics in nagano, japan, a total of fourteen sports venues, all within nagano prefecture, were used. construction of these venues, and of the olympic stadium which hosted the ceremonies, began in 1990 and lasted until 1997, with construction and land costs totaling 106.6 billion yen.[a 57] the most expensive venue constructed for the games was the long-track speed skating venue, m-wave built 5 kilometers from nagano station. between march 1996 and november 1997, these sites were tested with 16 different world champion events, world cups, and other international competitions to allow the organizers to prepare for the running of the games.[a 58]
five sites, all constructed for the games, are located in the city of nagano. minami nagano sports park, built to serve as a baseball park, was constructed in the south section of the city, near shinonoi station, and approximately 9 kilometers from nagano station. the stadium, which held the opening and closing ceremonies, resembles a cherry blossom, a symbol of japan.[b 5] the stadium can accommodate 50,000 with temporary stands added, but usually accommodates 35,000 spectators. big hat, named for its shape, was the principal site of ice hockey. big hat, located approximately 2 kilometers from nagano station, has a capacity of 10,104 spectators.[b 6] aqua wing arena was the second ice hockey arena at the games. shaped like a wing, it had a capacity of 6000 during the olympics. after the games, it was modified into an interior swimming pool.[b 7] aqua wing is approximately 5 kilometers from nagano station. its closest stations are kita-nagano station and asahi station. m-wave, used for speed skating, is the first indoor, long-track speed skating venue in japan. it was built to accommodate 10,000 spectators.[b 8] the venue, which gets its name from its m-shape, representing the surrounding mountains, is approximately 5 kilometers from nagano station. finally, white ring, with a maximum capacity of 7,351 spectators, was built for figure skating and short track speed skating.[b 9] white ring, which is used as a public gymnasium, is approximately 6 kilometers from nagano station.
hakuba village is situated 50 kilometers west of the city of nagano. hakuba hosted three olympics sites. alpine skiing's downhill, super g and combined were situated at happo'one resort. three courses between altitudes of 840 meters and 1,765 meters were used, one for the men's, women's and combined for both men's and women's. the site has a capacity of 20,000 spectators.[b 10] hakuba ski jumping stadium was the first ski jump built in japan with parallel 90 and 120 k-point hills. the ski jumping stadium can accommodate 45,000 spectators.[b 11] snow harp kamishiro was built for cross country skiing and nordic combined. it includes three tracks of 4.8, 4.8, and 7.8 kilometers, 6 meters wide. the stadium is another 1.2 kilometers. in total, snow harp has 19 kilometers of tracks. up to 20,000 spectators can be accommodated.[b 12]
nozawa onsen ski resort, in the town of nozawaonsen, was site of biathlon. nozawa is approximately 50 kilometers north of nagano. at nozawa onsen, the stadium was built around six existing tracks. two tracks, of 4 kilometers and 7 kilometers, were used for the games. the stadium can accommodate 20,000 spectators.[b 13]
two sites in the town of yamanouchi, approximately 30 kilometers northeast of nagano, were used. giant slalom was held at mount yakebitai at shiga kogen resort, at an altitude between 1,530 and 1,969 meters. the site can accommodate 20,000 spectators. also in shiga kogen, at mount higashidate, giant slalom events in alpine skiing and snowboarding were held.[b 14] kanbayashi snowboard park was the site of the half pipe events. the track is 120 meters long and 15 meters wide, with walls of 3.5 meters. 10,000 spectators can be accommodated at kanbayashi.[b 15]
the town of iizuna, approximately 12 kilometers northwest of nagano, was the site of freestyle skiing and bobsleigh, luge, and skeleton at iizuna kogen ski area. 8,000 spectators can watch the free style skiing on a course that 250 meters long and 12,000 can watch the jumps.[b 16] the spiral, which held the sledding events, was the first artificially refrigerated track in asia. it is 1700 meters long, with a difference in height of 114 meters and 15 turns. at the spiral, approximately 40,000 saplings, mainly beech and oak, were planted two per square meter, as part of the environmental stewardship committed during the winter games. the site can accommodate 10,000 spectators.[b 17]
finally, the town of karuizawa, approximately 80 southwest of nagano, hosted the curling events at kazakoshi park arena. the venue was built as a multi-purpose venue. its ice surface is 60 meters by 30. its maximum capacity is 1,924 spectators.[b 18] the town of karuizawa also hosted the equestrian events at the 1964 summer olympics, thus becoming the first place in the world to host both the summer olympics and winter olympics.
to accommodate the athletes and officials during the games, the olympic village was constructed in imai district, approximately 7 kilometers south of nagano station. along with the construction of the village, imai station was opened in 1997. the village was constructed by the city of nagano as public residential housing, and loaned to the organizing committee during the games.[b 19] the village occupies an area that is 19 hectares, composed of 23 buildings with a total of 1,032 apartments.[b 20] temporary restaurants and shops were also available during the games. the village was open from 24 january to 25 february 1998, and accommodated 3,200 people.[b 21] several prominent people were recognized as faces of the olympic village, including the honorary mayor yasuko konoe, mayor shozo sasahara, and deputy mayors takanori kono, hiroko chiba, and shun'ichi bobby hirai.[b 22]
because the curling arena was in karuizawa, 90 kilometers away, a satellite village was built in karuizawa, 7 kilometers from the arena.[b 23] it was open from 4 to 16 february 1998. in addition, a section of the shiga kogen prince hotel, 58 kilometers from the olympic village, was reserved for 180 snowboarders and officials.[b 24]
in addition to athletes and officials, members of the olympic family and other personnel were housed in 900 hotels in nagano and surrounding region, which represented 234,207 nights between 24 january to 25 february 1998. the members of the ioc stayed athletes the kokusai 21 hotel in downtown nagano. in total, the olympic family included 18,350 people. finally, two media villages were built in the districts of yanagimachi, near nagano station, and asahi, across the street from the m-wave.[a 59]
the olympic torch was lit by sunlight during a ceremony organized by the temple of hera at olympia, greece on 19 december 1997. a greek alpine skier started the relay towards athens where a ceremony was held at the panathenaic stadium. on 22 december, the flame was transported to japan by airplane. on 4 january, the 1998 winter olympics torch relay flame was divided into three parts in order for it to pass through every japanese prefecture by three distinct routes: the sea of japan route, the pacific route, and the eastern route. the start, on 6 january, was from okinawa, kagoshima, and hokkaido. by 23 january, the relay had travelled through all 120 municipalities of nagano prefecture, and finally arrived in nagano city on 5 february. the following day, after traveling through each district of the city, the relay arrived at the central square where three former athletes passed the flames to three members of the organizing committee. these three committee members then lit a torch held by juan antonio samaranch. on 7 february, the flame travelled another 10 kilometers, and the figure skater midori ito lit the cauldron at nagano olympic stadium during the opening ceremonies.
the olympic flame relay in japan was sponsored by coca-cola, lasted 33 days and travelled 1,162 kilometers. a group of 5.5 million people took part in relay activities. over the distance of the relay, which was run or skied, the flame was always followed by a group of six people: the runner who carried the flame, some who accompanied the carrier, and four people in supporting roles, for a total of 6,901 people. in addition, each relay was followed by two groups of 11 vehicles and more than 20 people.
the shape of the torch represented a traditional japanese torch called taimatsu. it was built with aluminum, was 55 centimeters long, and weighed 1.3 kilograms. the exterior of the torch was painted silver, to represent winter. runners were blue and white uniforms symbolizing the color of the games and of snow. the runners' uniforms included logos for the nagano olympics and the olympic games, a logo of the relay, and of coca-cola.
72 nations participated in the 1998 winter olympic games for a total of 2,176 athletes, of which 787 were female and 1,389 were male. with the addition of five countries and another 439 athletes since the 1994 winter olympic games at lillehammer, norway, these were the largest winter olympics ever at the time. the nations of azerbaijan, kenya, macedonia, uruguay, and venezuela participated in their first winter olympic games. iran returned to the winter games after a 22-year absence, and north korea, india, ireland, and yugoslavia returned after 8 years. five countries, fiji, mexico, san marino, american samoa, and senegal, which were at the 1994 games, did not participate in 1998.
the united states had the largest athlete delegation with 186, followed by host japan with 156, canada with 144, and germany with 125. despite the large number of participating delegations, 40 of the 72 delegations had less than 10 athletes, with 12 nations having one sole athlete. 15 nations had between 11–50 athletes, 11 nations had between 51–100 athletes, and six nations had more than 101 athletes. nations that participated in the ice hockey tournaments generally had the largest athlete delegations. with the exception of norway and switzerland, all 12 national delegations with 60 or more athletes participated in either or both of the female or male ice hockey tournaments.
the number in parentheses represents the number of athletes participating in official events.[11]
the 1998 winter olympics were held from saturday, 7 february to sunday, 22 february. this was 16 days and included three weekends. the number of events increased from 61 at the 1994 winter olympics to 68 in 1998. two sports, curling and snowboarding were added to the program, as was women's ice hockey. this increased the number of sports to seven, and the number of disciplines to 14. the sporting program started and ended with ice hockey. the first matches started at 4:00 pm on 7 february featuring kazakhstan defeating italy 5–3, and slovakia tying austria 2–2. the final match was played on sunday 22 february from 1:45 pm, and the czech republic defeated russia 1–0.
due to averse weather conditions, multiple events were delayed, including six alpine skiing races, snowboarding, and biathlon. of these, the men's downhills was delayed five days.

the opening ceremony took place at nagano olympic stadium, nagano, japan, on 7 february 1998.[12] japanese figure skater, midori ito, who was the first female skater to land seven triple jumps in a free skating competition, and who won the silver medal at the 1992 winter olympics, lit the cauldron during the ceremony.
seiji ozawa, a japanese conductor, directed an orchestra from five continents[13] performing the fourth movement of the beethoven symphony no. 9 (ode to joy).[14]
in all, 2,302 athletes from 72 countries and regions participated in the competition,[15] including 814 female athletes and 1488 male athletes. both the number of participating delegations and the number of athletes participating in the competition were, at the time, the most ever.
the medal ceremonies for indoor events (skating, ice hockey, and curling) took place immediately after the finals at the venues, with the exception of the bronze medal matches for the ice hockey events which took place immediately after the bronze medal matches. for events that took place outside (skiing, biathlon, bobsleigh and luge), a simple ceremony was arranged where bouquets of flowers were awarded, and their medal ceremonies took place that evening in the central square in nagano city, approximately midway between nagano station and zenkō-ji.[b 25] a short fanfare of music was placed, the athletes arrived, and the medals, in the order of gold, silver, and bronze, were given with flowers.[b 26] finally, the nationally flags of the athletes were raised, and the national anthem of the winning athlete(s) was played. in all, 167,200 people attended the medal ceremonies, which took place at 7:00 pm each night. music and dance performances took place before and the awarding of medals.[b 27]
the medals awarded to the top three finishers measured 80mm in diameter and 9.7 mm in thickness.[b 28] the gold medals weighed 256g, the silver medals weighed 250g, and the bronze medals weighed 230g.[b 29] these medals were made using a traditional japanese lacquerware technique known as 漆器 (shikki). to make the medals, a brass core is imprinted with the design by layering gold powder onto the wet lacquer using a technique called maki-e.[b 30] on the front of the medals are borders of olive leaves, and in the center, a maki-e morning sun rises over a cloisonné emblem of the nagano olympics.[b 31] on the back side, the snowflower emblem of the games sits above a maki-e image of the mountains surrounding nagano glowing in the morning sun rise.[b 32] artisans from the region of kiso, nagano handcrafted the initial lacquering, and the medal was completed at the mint bureau of the japanese ministry of finance.[b 33]
in addition to the top three athletes in each event, more than 19,000 commemorative medals were given to all athletes, offices, members of the ioc, media personnel, and others. these medals, made by the mint bureau in cooperation with naoc, were made with an alloy of 90% copper and 10% zinca.[b 34] diplomas, written in japanese, french, and english, were given to the top eight finishers in each event, and all participants received a commemorative diploma.[b 35]
the closing ceremonies, like those of the opening, took place in the nagano olympic stadium, with 60,000 spectators, including akihito, the emperor of japan at the time, and his wife empress michiko. after the athletes entered with their flags, hundreds of drums were beat and a traditional hose and lion dance was presented. tasuku tsukada, the mayor of nagano presented the olympic flag to deedee corradini, the mayor of salt lake city, the host of the 2002 winter olympics. this was followed by a performance from the japanese singer anri. the ceremony ended with the words "sayonara, arigato" ("goodbye, thank you") spoken by the commentator and a major fireworks performance.
in all, 24 of the 72 participating nations at these games won at least one medal, as shown in the table below. a total of 15 countries won at least one gold medal and 18 nations won two or more medals. in total, 205 medals were distributed. germany finished on top of the table with 29 medals, including 12 gold, nine silver, and eight bronze. germany, which finished in third place in the medal standings at the 1994 winter olympics, won most of its medals in alpine skiing, speed skating, and luge, in which it won all three gold medals. german female athletes won 22 of the country's 29 medals. norway finished in second, as in 1994, with 25 medals, including nine won in cross-country skiing and five in biathlon. russia, which finished atop the medals standing in 1994, finished in third in 1998, with 9 gold medals, including five gold in the women's cross-country skiing. canada moved from seventh in 1994 to fourth in 1998 with 6 gold medals, and the united states remained in fifth place. netherlands finished in 6th place, 12 places higher than in 1994, thanks to 5 gold medals, all in speed skating. host japan beat its previous record of medals at a winter games, with 10 medals, including five gold. australia and denmark each won their first ever medals in the winter olympics with a bronze in women's slalom and a silver in women's curling, respectively. in addition, bulgaria and the czech republic each won their first gold medals at a winter olympics in women's biathlon and men's ice hockey respectively. finally, kazakhstan won its first winter olympics medal by a female athlete.
  *   host nation (japan)the 1998 winter olympics featured 68 medal events over 14 disciplines in seven sports. this was an increase from 61 events in 12 disciplines across six sports from the 1994 winter olympics. curling was the additional sport, snowboarding was an additional discipling in skiing, and women's ice hockey was added to the ice hockey program.
the biathlon competitions took place at nozawa onsen snow resort, north of nagano city. the six events were the sprint, individual, and relay, for both men and women. in all, 183 athletes took part, including 96 men and 87 women from 32 different countries. norway and germany each won five medals, with uschi disl from the latter country winning one gold, one silver, and one bronze.
the first event was the women's 15 km individual race that took place in falling snow on 9 february. the surprise gold medalist was ekaterina dafovska from bulgaria, who had been ranked 51st at the previous biathlon world cup. her gold medal was the first-ever bulgarian gold medal at a winter olympics. her time was 54:52.0, with only one target missed. olena petrova from ukraine won the silver, 17.8 seconds behind, and uschi disl won the bronze, 25.9 seconds behind dafovska.
the first men's event, the 20 km individual race, took place on 11 february. the norwegian halvard hanevold missed his second-last target, but finished first in a time of 56:16.4. the italian pieralberto carrara, who missed no targets, target, won the silver, 5.05 seconds behind. the belarusian alexei aidarov was 30.1 seconds behind the norwegian, and won the bronze.
the bobsleigh competitions took place at the spiral, in iizuna, just north of nagano city. the spiral course measured 1700 m in length, with fifteen curves, descended 113 m from start to finish, and included two short uphill sections. the two events were the two-man and four-man, for men only. female competitors would begin competing in the two woman events at the subsequent winter olympics, the 2002 winter olympics in salt lake city.
in all, 156 athletes took part from 28 different countries. the bobsleigh events resulted in two ties, for the two-man gold and for the four-man bronze. this was the first time in olympic bobsleigh history that there were ties for the medal positions. christoph langen and markus zimmermann won bronze in the two-man competition and were part of the winning four-man team. in all, germany win one gold and one bronze; italy and canada also won one gold each when the two-man team. six team in all won medals. the first time since the 1968 winter olympics did more than four countries win bobsleigh medals. in addition, germany and switzerland were the only two countries to place two sleds in the top ten of either event.[16]
the 1996 and 1997 bobsleigh world champions were teams from germany and italy respectively. however, günther huber and antonio tartaglia from italy tied with the two-man team from canada, pierre lueders: and dave maceachern for the gold medal, each with combined times of 3:37.24. no silver medal was awarded. the german team of christoph langen and markus zimmermann were 0.65 seconds behind, and were awarded the bronze.
in the four-man event, bad weather restricted the competition to three runs only. the german team of christoph langen, markus zimmermann, marco jakobs and olaf hampel completed the three runs in 2:39.41 for the gold medal. the swiss team of marcel rohner, markus nüssli, markus wasser, and beat seitz finished second with a time of 2:40.01. two teams, were awarded bronze medals after completing the three runs in 2:40.06. these were the team from great britain, made up of sean olsson, dean ward, courtney rumbolt, and paul attwood; and the team from france, composed of bruno mingeon, emmanuel hostache, éric le chanony, and max robert.
curling was included in the program for the nagano olympics in 1993 following discussions that had begun in 1992. at the time, it was considered that curling was making its official olympic debut following its appearance as a demonstration sport at the 1932, 1988, and 1992. at the games in nagano, both the men's and the women's curling tournament took place at kazakoshi park arena in karuizawa, nagano, 30 minutes by bullet train (shinkansen) south of nagano city. eight teams played a total of seven games in the round robin in both tournaments, with the four best teams going to the semifinals. canada won gold in the women's competition and silver in the men's; switzerland won the gold in the men's tournament.
in the men's tournament, the mike harris team from canada easily completed the round-robin tournament winning six of its seven games, only losing to the eigil ramsfjell team from norway. in the semi-finals, the canadian team defeated tim somerville's team from the united states by a score of 7–1; and in the other semi-final, the team from switzerland led by patrick hürlimann defeated norway 8–7. in the gold medal game, switzerland shocked canada by winning 9–3. in the bronze medal game, eigil ramsfjell's team from norway defeated tim somerville's usa team by a score of 9–4.
in the women's tournament, the sandra schmirler team from canada and the elisabet gustafson team from sweden easily completed the round-robin tournament, with both teams winning six of their seven games. canada only lost to the dordi nordby team from norway, and sweden's only loss was to canada. in the semi-finals, the canadian team defeated the team led by kirsty hay representing team great britain by a score of 6–5; and in the other semi-final, the team from denmark led by helena blach lavrsen defeated sweden 7–5. in the gold medal game, canada defeated denmark by a score of 7–5. in the bronze medal game, elisabet gustafso's team from sweden defeated kirsty hay's gb team by a score of 10–6.
the ice hockey matches took place at two purpose-built arenas in nagano city, big hat and aqua wing arena. the ice hockey events were significant for two reasons: the first olympic ice hockey tournament for women and the participation of professional players from the nhl, the north american professional ice hockey league. the czech republic defeated russia in the gold medal game for the men's final, and americans defeated canadians in the gold medal game for the women's final.
the men's competition began on 7 february with eight teams playing in two groups of four, group a and b, with each team playing n three games. the winners of these two groups, kazakhstan and belarus, advanced to join groups c and d, composed of the six highest ranked men's national ice hockey teams in the world. russia, czech republic, and finland were joined by kazakhstan in group c; canada, sweden, and usa were joined by belarus in group d. on 22 february, with 10,010 spectators in attendance at big hat, the czech republic defeated russia in the gold medal game for the men's final, 1–0, with the lone goal of the match scored with 12 minutes remaining. finland defeated canada for the bronze medal by a score of 3–2.
the first women's ice hockey world championship, a biennial tournament, took place in 1990. discussions to include women's ice hockey at the 1998 games began in 1992, and it was decided to include them in the program in 1993. the tournament included six teams playing in a one-group round-robin tournament. the top two team advanced to the gold medal game, and the teams ranked third and fourth played in the bronze medal match. the favorites were the canadians, who had won the three previous world championships, with the americans finishing second each time. in the round-robin tournament, the americans finished first, with the canadians second. in the last round-robin game, the americans handily defeated the canadians, 7–4, with the two teams scoring nine goals in the third period. in the gold medal match, with 8,626 fans in attendance at big hat, the americans defeated the canadians 3–1. the team from finland defeated the team from china 4–1.
the luge competitions took place in iizuna, nagano, at the spiral (nagano bobsleigh-luge park), the first purpose-built permanent bobsleigh, luge, and skeleton track in asia. in all, 24 nations took part in the luge events, with four countries, india, south korea, new zealand, and venezuela making their olympic debut in luge events. there were three events, men's single, women's single, and doubles. germany won all three gold medals, one silver, and one bronze. the united states won one silver and one bronze. italy and austria rounded out the medal table.
the first event with 24 lugers was the men's singles. each athlete completed four runs over two days, 8 and 9 february. the german athlete, georg hackl, who had won gold at the 1992 winter olympics and 1994 winter olympics, had entered the competition winless in the 1997–1998 season. hackl raced in a newly designed luge and aerodynamic shoes. several team protested but these protests were rejected. hackl dominated all four races, and finished with a time of 3:18.436, half a second ahead of the italian armin zöggeler. zöggeler finished .154 seconds ahead of jens müller of germany, who had won gold at the 1988 winter olympics when he competed for east germany.
on 10 and 11 february, the women's singles event took place, with each athlete completing four runs. in all, 29 athletes took part. the race for gold was very tight between two german athletes, silke kraushaar and barbara niedernhuber, with kraushaar winning by .002 seconds, with a total time of 3:23.779 – the smallest margin of victory ever at the olympics. angelika neuner of austria won the bronze, 0.474 seconds behind the gold medalist.
the two-race doubles competition, which in theory were open to females, consisted of 17 male pairs. the event took place 13 february. the germans stefan krauße and jan behrendt, who had competed together for 14 years, won the gold medal with a time of 1:41.105. two american teams won silver and bronze, with chris thorpe and gordy sheer finishing .022 seconds behind the gold medalists and brian martin and mark grimmette a further .09 seconds behind. the win by krauße and behrendt was their 
four medal at the olympics since they won silver at the 1988 winter olympics when they competed for east germany. this was the first time since the introduction of luge at the 1964 winter olympics that athletes other than those from austria, germany, italy, and the soviet union won medals.
the figure skating events took place at the white ring (arena), an indoor arena built for the games in nagano city. medals were awarded in four events: men's and women's singles, pair skating, and ice dance. the pairs event took place from 8–10 february, followed by the men's singles from 12–14 february, the ice dance from 13–16 february, and the women's singles from 18–20 february. the exhibition gala took place on 21 february. russia won five medals, including three gold and two silver. the usa won one gold and one silver. france won two bronze medals. canada won one silver, with china and germany each winning one bronze.
six short track speed skating events took place at the white ring (arena) from 17 to 21 february. a total of 18 nations were representing among the skaters. four countries won medals. south korea won six medals, including three gold. canada won four medals, including two gold. host japan won one gold and one silver; and china won five silver and one bronze medal.
the 14th ranked japanese skater takafumi nishitani beat the olympic record in the 500m semi-finals. in the final, he lead from the start and won the gold medal with a time of 42.862 seconds. the canadian marc gagnon, who was in second place, fell with two laps remaining. the chinese skater an yulong won the silver with a time of 43.022, 0.5 seconds of the japanese skater hitoshi uematsu. in the 1000 meters, world record holder marc gagnon was disqualified for obstruction in the quarter-finals. the chinese skater li jiajun, who led for most of the final, was passed by the south korean skater, kim dong-sung, in the final corner. kim won with a time of 1:32.375, 0.053 seconds ahead of the silver medalist. the canadian éric bédard won the bronze, .223 seconds further behind. in the 5000m relays, world-title holders from italy led at the beginning of the relay but were passed by the canadians, and fell. with about one-quarter of the race left, a chinese skater fell, bringing down with him a south korean skater, allowing the canadians to easily win the gold, with a time of 7:06.075. the south koreans were .701 seconds behind, with the chinese finishing with the bronze a further 4 seconds back. the japanese team won the b-final with a time that was five seconds faster than the gold medalists.
in the women's 500m final, the canadian isabelle charest collided with the chinese wang chunlu, and both fell. charest was disqualified and wang, angry, never finished the race.  the canadian annie perreault won the gold with a time of 46.568 seconds, 0.059 seconds ahead of yang yang (s) of china. because these were the only two to finish the race, the bronze medal went to the winner of the b-final, the south korean chun lee-kyung. in the 1000m race, the chinese skater yang yang (a) led the race but was passed by the 500m bronze medalist, chun, in the last straight away to the finish line. chun won the race with a time of 1:42.776 seconds. yang yang (a) was disqualified for using her elbow to try to block chun. yang yang (s) won the silver, 0.567 seconds behind the gold medalist from south korea. won hye-kyung, also of south korea, won the bronze a further 0.18 seconds behind. in the 3000m relay, the chinese team led for most of the race but the south korean skater kim yun-mi passed yang yang (a) in the last changeover. both teams beat the world record, with the south koreans finishing with a time of 4:16.260, and the chinese were 0.123 seconds behind. the canadian team won bronze with a time of 4:21.205.
from 8–20 february 171 athletes from 25 countries took part in the long-track speed skating events that were held in nagano city at m-wave, japan's first indoor, long-track speed skating venue. in all, eight countries won medals. the netherlands won 11 medals, including five gold and four silver. canada, host japan, and the usa also won multiple medals. twelve olympic records and five world records were established at the games on the ice at m-wave. gianni romme and marianne timmer, both of the netherlands, each won two gold medals. the nagano olympics were the first where athletes wore clap skates.
on the men's side, the world record holder in the men's 500m was the japanese skater hiroyasu shimizu. shimizu was the smallest skater at the games, 1.62m tall. the 500m was run over two races for the first time at these games. shimizu was fastest in both races becoming only the second ever japanese to win a singles title at the olympic games. finishing in second and third were the canadian skaters, jeremy wotherspoon and kevin overland, who are 1.91m and 1.84 m tall, respectively. shimizu's combined time was 1:11.35, 0.49 seconds ahead of wotherspoon, and another 0.02 seconds ahead of overland. the 1500m was won by norwegian ådne søndrål with a world record time of 1:47.87. søndrål was 0.26 and 0.65 seconds ahead of two dutch skaters, ids postma, and rintje ritsma. in the 1000m, postma won gold, with a time of 1:10.64, followed by another dutch skater jan bos, who was 0.07 seconds behind, and shimizu who won the bronze with a time of 1:11.00. in the 5000m, the dutch skater gianni romme won gold, with a world record time of 6:22.20, followed by ritsma, who was 6.04 seconds behind, and bart veldkamp, representing belgium who won the bronze with a time of 6:28.31. finally, in the 10,000m, three dutch skaters won medals. romme won gold with a world record time, 15 seconds ahead of the world record, of 13:15.33, bob de jong won silver, and ritsma won bronze.
on the women's side, the 500 m title was won by the canadian catriona le may doan, the favorite, who beat or equalled the world record four times before the games. her teammate, susan auch, finished second. both were coached by susan's brother, derrick auch. tomomi okazaki, of host japan, won the bronze medal. in the 1500m, dutch skater marianne timmer won gold with a world record time of 1:57.58. the german skater gunda niemann was second, 1.08 seconds behind, and the american skater chris witty won bronze with a time of 1:58.97. in the 1000m, timmer won gold again, with a time of 1:16.51. witty won silver, 0.26 seconds behind, and le may doan won bronze with a time of 1:17.37. the german skater franziska schenk, one of the favorites, fell during the second lap. in the 3000m, german skaters won all three medals. niemann won gold with a time of 4:07.29; claudia pechstein won silver, 1.18 seconds back; and anni friesinger won bronze with a time of 4:09.44. finally, in the 5000m, pechstein won gold with a world record time of 6:59.61; niemann was 0.04 seconds back for silver, and the kazakh skater lyudmila prokasheva won bronze, with a time of 7:11.14. prokasheva's medal was the first medal by a female kazakh athlete at any winter olympics.
the alpine skiing events took place at hakuba happoone winter resort in hakuba village, 50 kilometers west of nagano city, and at mount higashidate in the shiga highlands in yamanouchi, nagano, 30 kilometers northeast of nagano city. in all, 249 athletes, 141 males and 108 females, from 49 countries, took part in the 10 alpine skiing events, men's and women's downhill, super-g, giant slalom, slalom, and combined. austria won 11 medals, including three gold. germany also won three gold, and six medals in total. seven other countries also won medals, including australia, whose zali steggall won that countries first ever winter olympics medal. the most successful athletes at these games were katja seizinger from germany, who won two gold medals and one bronze; and hermann maier, from austria, who won two gold medals.
the cross-country skiing events took place at nozawa onsen ski resort, in the town of nozawaonsen, approximately 50 kilometers north of nagano. in all, 228 athletes, including 126 men and 102 women, from 37 countries took part. russia won eight medals, including five gold medals, and norway won nine medals, including four gold medals. six other countries also won medals, including finland with one gold and two bronze, and italy with two silver and two bronze. larisa lazutina from russia won five medals, including three gold; and bjørn dæhlie from norway won four medals, including three gold.
the freestyle skiing competition was held at the iizuna kogen ski area, 12 kilometers north of nagano, from 8 to 18 february. it was the third consecutive games that freestyle skiing events took place. the four events, men's and women's moguls and aerials, involved 110 athletes from 25 countries . the united states won three gold medals. host japan won one gold medal. athletes from finland won a silver and a bronze medal. six other countries took home either one silver or one bronze medal.
in men's moguls, the american jonny moseley was first after the qualifications. two cousins from finland, janne lahtela and sami mustonen, who had never medalled at the fis freestyle ski world cup, were ranked second and third behind moseley. moseley easily won the final with a score of 26.93. lahtela was .93 points behind, and mustonen was another .24 points behind. the canadian, jean-luc brassard, gold medalist from the 1994 winter olympics, finished in fourth. in men's aerials, the american eric bergoust, who had fallen during training, overtook the other competitors with a score of 255.64 points. the frenchmen, sébastien foucras, and the belarussian, dmitri dashinski, were second and third. the canadian, nicolas fontaine, world champion in 1997, only managed 10th place after falling on his second jump.
the japanese moguls skier, tae satoya, 11th after qualifications, surprised everyone by winning the gold medal with a score of 25.06. she was the first female japanese olympic champion. the german, tatjana mittermayer scored 24.62 points and won the silver medal.  the norwegian, kari traa, won the bronze with a score of 24.09 points. in women's aerials, american nikki stone won the gold medal with a score of 193.00 points. the ex-gymnast, xu nannan from china won silver with a score of 186.97, and colette brand from switzerland won bronze with a score of 171.83.
the nordic combined events were held at the hakuba ski jumping stadium and the snow harp, both in hakuba village, 50 kilometers west of nagano city. in all, 53 athletes from 14 countries, took part in the two events, individual and team. norway won both gold medals. finland won both silver medals. france and russia each won one of the bronze medals.
the first event was the individual competition that took place on 13 and 14 february. in all, there were 48 athletes. the silver medalist from the 1994 winter olympics, the norwegian bjarte engen vik, was the 1997–98 fis nordic combined world cup leader. at the hakuba ski jumping stadium, vik led after the first two jumps. he was followed by the russian valeri stoliarov. the following day, the skiers left, in order of the placement following the ski jump, along te 15 kilometer cross-country race at the snow harp. the race was skied in the rain. vik led throughout and finished with a 27.5 second lead over second place. with three kilometers to the finish line, the finnish athlete, 18-year-old samppa lajunen, who was sixth after the jumps, caught up with stoliarov. the skied together until the stadium, and 60 meters from the finish line, lajunen passed the russian and picked up the silver medal 0.7 seconds ahead of stoliarov who won the bronze. the fastest athlete on the course was the swiss skier, marco zarucchi, who was 43rd after the jumps, finished in 25th place.
eleven nations took part in the team event on 19 and 20 february. at previous olympics, the team event involved three athletes per team, with the completing a 3x10 kilometer relay. at nagano, the team was enlarged to four athletes who completed a 4x5 kilometer relay. after the jumps, the team from finland led by four seconds ahead of the austrians, eight seconds ahead of the norwegians, nine ahead of the czechs, and 29 seconds ahead of the japanese. the relay took place in rain. the norwegians quickly took the lead and never looked back. the last norwegian skier had the time to grab his country's flag with 500 meters from the finish line, and they won gold with more than one minute lead over the team from finland. the french team, sixth after the jumps, won the bronze medal ahead of the austrians. the japanese, gold medalists at the 1992 winter olympics and 1994 winter olympics finished in fifth.
the ski jumping competitions took place at the hakuba ski jumping stadium in hakuba village, 50 kilometers west of nagano city. in all, 68 athletes from 19 countries participated. for the first time, the top 30 jumpers qualified for the second round. host japan won the most medals, including two gold in the large hill and large hill team. finland, germany, and austria rounded out the medal table. kazuyoshi funaki from yoichi, hokkaido in japan won two gold and one silver for the host country.
the normal hill jumps took place on 11 february in front of 45,000 spectators. the japanese, who had dominated the 1997–98 fis ski jumping world cup season, were the favorites. with a jump of 91.5 meters, masahiko harada lead after the first round ahead of the finnish jumper, jani soininen
kazuyoshi funaki, who was fourth after the first round, took the lead with a jump of 90.5 meters in the second round. after a delay caused by strong wind, soininen took the lead with only harada still to jump. a sidewind blew when harada jumped, and only managed 84.5 meters to finish in fifth place overall. soininen won gold with 234.5 points, funaki was second with 233.5, and the austrian andreas widhölzl finished third with 232.5 points.
on 15 february, the large hill jump competition took place. 60,000 spectators gathered at hakuba ski jumping stadium. normal hill bronze medalist widhölzl led after the first round, ahead of the japanese jumper takanobu okabe, jani soininen et funaki. in the second round, funaki jumped 132.5 m, and, for the first time at the olympics, received perfect points for his style. he jumped into first place and won the gold medal with 272.3 points overall. it was the first japanese gold medal in ski jumping since the 1972 winter olympics in sapporo. harada jumped next. unfortunately, the measurement system was installed between 95 and 135 meters and his jump was beyond that. he was measured manually to be 136 meters. he also had good points but only managed to win the bronze medal with 258.3. meters. soininen won the silver with a combined score of 260.8 points.
at the 1994 winter olympics, the japanese team were the favorites but harada jumped poorly, costing the japanese the gold medal. again, in 1998, the japanese were the favorites. the team event took place on 17 february. the start was slowed by 30 minutes because of heavy falling snow. the first two japanese jumpers, okabe at hiroya saitō, jumped japan into first place. harada completely missed his jump, jumping only 79.5 meters, and despite funaki having a good jump, japan drop from first to fourth after the first round behind austria, germany, and norway. okabe jumped 137 meters, which was an olympic record. saitō followed this with a good jump. harada was next, and like okabe, jumped 137 meters. the last jumper was funaki who jumped 125 meters, and the japanese team became olympic champions with 933.0 points. the germans won silver with 897.4 points, and the austrians finished with 881.5 points for the bronze.
in the decade leading up the games, snowboarding had become popular in both north america and europe, as well as japan, and as a result, in august 1994, the naoc received a request from the ioc president samaranch to consider including snowboarding at the 1998 winter olympics.[a 60] to reduce costs, naoc asked the host community to cover a portion of the costs – the town yamanouchi agreed – and fis was expected to support financially as well.[a 61] in november 1995, the naoc executive board agreed to add snowboarding, and this was approved by the ioc at their december meeting the following month in karuizawa.[a 62] this was the first winter olympics with snowboarding events. the events took place at mount yakebitai and kanbayashi snowboard park in yamanouchi, nagano, 30 kilometers northeast of nagano city, from 8 to 12 february. in all, 125 athletes from 22 countries participated in the men's and women's halfpipe and giant slalom. athletes from germany won two medals, including one gold. athletes from switzerland, france, and canada also won gold medals.
in the men's giant slalom, the canadian jasey-jay anderson won the first race with a half-second lead ahead of rebagliati. during the second race, the event was temporary delayed because of snow and fog. ross rebagliati finished with a combined time of 2:03.96, 0.02 seconds ahead of the italian thomas prugger, and another 0.10 seconds ahead of the swiss ueli kestenholz. controversy occurred when three days after the men's giant slalom, the ioc determined that gold medalist rebagliati from canada, was disqualified after testing positive for marijuana.[b 36] it was the first time in olympic history that an athlete was disqualified for marijuana. the canadian olympic committee lodged a protest and the case quickly went to the court of arbitration for sport where it was ruled that because marijuana was not classified as a "banned" substance, the medal should be returned to the canadian athlete. in the halfpipe, the gold medal went to the swiss gian simmen, who had the highest score, 85.2, despite a heavy rain. the norwegian daniel franck won the silver with a score of 82.4, and the american ross powers won the bronze with a score of 82.1.
the women's giant slalom was delayed one day because of a snowstorm. the big favorite, the frenchwoman karine ruby won the first race with almost two seconds ahead of her compatriot isabelle blanc. ruby won the second race, with blanc missing the last gate and falling. ruby's combined time was 2:17.34. the german heidi renoth won the silver with a time of 2:19.17, and the austrian brigitte köck won the bronze with a time of 2:19.42. in the halfpipe, the norwegian stine brun kjeldaas won the qualification round. however, in the finals, the german nicola thost, a former gymnast, finished second in both legs, scored 74.6 points, which was enough for the gold medal. stine brun kjeldaas finished fourth in the first leg and first in second, winning the silver with 74.2 points. the american shannon dunn-downing won the first leg, but finished seventh in the second leg, leaving her with the bronze with a score of 72.8.
the nagano olympics were covered by more than 10,000 members of the media, including 8,329 accredited journalists, of which 2,586 were from newspaper media and 5,743 television and radio journalists. the organizing committee established main press center (mpc, over two buildings, and 17 annexes throughout the different sites.
the mpc, which is today the wakasato civic cultural hall,[17] was built beside big hat, the main ice hockey venue. the mpc had a surface area of 42,728 m2, with one principal room for 600 journalists of 1430m2 and another of 5100m2 that was rented by various press agencies.[a 63] the largest press offices at the games were kyodo news, associated press, agence france-presse, reuters, and deutsche presse-agentur.[a 64] the mpc also included a press conference room for 600 people.[a 65]
the host broadcaster for the games, the olympic radio and televisions organization (orto'98) was established as a separate organization within naoc, the organizing committee.[a 66] orto'98 was created between nhk, the japanese national broadcaster, the national association of broadcasters (nab), and naoc.[a 67] a total of 1647 staff worked 386 cameras at the various venues and events,[a 68] with coverage increasing by 55% over the 1994 winter olympics in lillehammer.[a 69] the games were broadcast in 160 countries, 40 more than in lillehammer,[a 70] and it was estimated that 10.7 billion viewers watched the games over the 16-day period.[a 71]
broadcasting rights totaled 513 million us dollars, which was a record for the winter olympics, and all contracts with 16 broadcasting rights' holders were record sums.[a 72] this money was split 60–40 between naoc and the ioc.[a 73] the american broadcasting network, cbs, paid 375 million us dollars, to distribute the games in the united states.
cbs sports;[b]  united states: in the united states, this was the last of three cycles for cbs olympic broadcasts.
ebu (europe), headquartered in geneva, is composed of 117 member organizations in 56 countries. distributors in the european national markets are listed below.
cbc;  canada
seven network, fox sports;  australia
tvnz;  new zealand
oti; (south america)
sabc;  south africa,
urtna; northern africa
supersport intl; africa (satellite broadcast)
cvm tv;  jamaica
abu; asia
kbs;  korea (satellite broadcast)
astro;  malaysia (satellite broadcast)
atv; asia (satellite broadcast)
notes
citations
hanazawa, nahomi (1999).  the shinano mainichi shimbun (ed.). official report of the 1998 winter olympic games, vol. 1: planning and support (pdf). translated by norman kong. nagano (japan): naoc. p. 319. isbn 4784098259.
hanazawa, nahomi (1999).  the shinano mainichi shimbun (ed.). official report of the 1998 winter olympic games, vol. 2: sixteen days of glory (pdf). translated by norman kong. nagano (japan): naoc. p. 319. isbn 4784098267.

the 2002 winter olympics, officially the xix olympic winter games and commonly known as salt lake 2002, was a winter multi-sport event that was celebrated from 8 to 24 february 2002 in and around salt lake city, utah, united states.
2,399 athletes from 78 nations participated in 78 events in fifteen disciplines, held throughout 165 sporting sessions.[1][2] the 2002 winter olympics and the 2002 paralympic games were both organized by the salt lake organizing committee (sloc), the first time in olympic and paralympic history that both events were organized by a single committee.[3] utah became the fifth state in the united states to host the olympic games. these were the first olympic games under the ioc presidency of jacques rogge.
the opening ceremony was held on february 8, 2002, and sporting competitions were held up until the closing ceremony on february 24, 2002.[3] production for both ceremonies was designed by seven nielsen, and music for both ceremonies was directed by mark watters.[4] salt lake city became the most populous area ever to have hosted the winter olympics, although the two subsequent host cities' populations were larger.[5] following a trend, the 2002 olympic winter games were also larger than all prior winter games, with 10 more events than the 1998 winter olympics in nagano, japan. norway won the most gold medals while germany won the most number of medals.[6]
the salt lake games faced a bribery scandal and some local opposition during the bid. nevertheless, from sporting and business standpoints, this was one of the most successful winter olympiads in history; records were set in both the broadcasting and marketing programs. over 2 billion viewers watched more than 13 billion viewer-hours.[7] the games were also financially successful raising more money with fewer sponsors than any prior olympic games, which left sloc with a surplus of $40 million. the surplus was used to create the utah athletic foundation, which maintains and operates many of the remaining olympic venues.[7]
salt lake city was chosen over québec city, canada; sion, switzerland; and östersund, sweden, on june 16, 1995, at the 104th ioc session in budapest, hungary.[8] salt lake city had previously come in second during the bids for the 1998 winter olympics, awarded to nagano, japan, and had offered to be the provisional host of the 1976 winter olympics when the original host, denver, colorado, withdrew. the 1976 winter olympics were ultimately awarded to innsbruck, austria.
1because of the no-commercialization policy of the olympics on venues, the delta center, now the vivint smart home arena, was labeled as the "salt lake ice center".
the oxford olympics study established the outturn cost of the salt lake city 2002 winter olympics at us$2.5 billion in 2015-dollars and cost overrun at 24% in real terms.[23] this includes sports-related costs only, that is, (i) operational costs incurred by the organizing committee for the purpose of staging the games, e.g., expenditures for technology, transportation, workforce, administration, security, catering, ceremonies, and medical services, and (ii) direct capital costs incurred by the host city and country or private investors to build, e.g., the competition venues, the olympic village, international broadcast center, and media and press center, which are required to host the games. indirect capital costs are not included, such as for road, rail, or airport infrastructure, or for hotel upgrades or other business investment incurred in preparation for the games but not directly related to staging the games. the cost and cost overrun for salt lake city 2002 compares with costs of us$2.5 billion and a cost overrun of 13% for vancouver 2010, and costs of us$51[24] billion and a cost overrun of 289% for sochi 2014, the latter being the most costly olympics to date. average cost for winter games since 1960 is us$3.1 billion, average cost overrun is 142%.
in february 1999, in response to the bid scandal and a financial shortfall for the games, mitt romney, then ceo of the private equity firm bain capital (and future presidential candidate), was hired as the new president and ceo of the salt lake organizing committee.[25] romney, kem c. gardner, a utah commercial real estate developer, and don stirling, the olympics' local marketing chief, raised "millions of dollars from mormon families with pioneer roots: the eccles family, whose forebears were important industrialists and bankers" to help rescue the games, according to a later report.[26] an additional $410 million was received from the federal government.[27] u.s. federal subsidies amounted to $1.3 billion (for infrastructure improvements only), compared to $45 billion of federal funding received by the sochi 2014 organizing committee from the russian government.[28][29] the games were financially successful raising more money with fewer sponsors than any prior olympic games, which left sloc with a surplus of $40 million. the surplus was used to create the utah athletic foundation, which maintains and operates many of the remaining olympic venues.[7]
a total of 78[2] national olympic committees sent athletes to the 2002 olympics. cameroon, hong kong (china), nepal, tajikistan, and thailand participated in their first winter olympic games.
the 2002 winter olympics featured 78 medal events over 15 disciplines in 7 sports.
numbers in parentheses indicate the number of medal events contested in each separate discipline.
in the following calendar for the 2002 winter olympic games, each blue box represents an event competition, such as a qualification round, on that day. the yellow boxes represent days during which medal-awarding finals for a sport are held. the number in each box represents the number of finals that were contested on that day.[30]
  *   host nation (united states)several medals records were set and/or tied. they included (bold-face indicates broken during the vancouver olympics):
prior to the ceremony, the turf inside the stadium was removed and a giant, abstract shaped ice rink, designed by seven nielsen, was installed, covering a large part of the stadium floor. performers would later perform on ice skates, rather than shoes.[35]
an american flag rescued from the world trade center site on september 11 was carried into the stadium by an honor guard of american athletes and was carried in by firefighters and police officers. the mormon tabernacle choir, clad in white sweaters, performed the star spangled banner, the u.s. national anthem, as the flag was raised. the parade of the 2,300 athletes was led by the child of light and began traditionally with greece and ending with the host nation, the united states of america. as the artistic section kicked off, the five native utah native american tribes arrived together on horseback and performed several traditional "welcome" stomp dances. the dixie chicks also performed.
the beauty of the utah landscape was showcased as huge puppets of native utah animals, including a 15-foot-long bison and the american bald eagle (the national bird and animal of the u.s.), entered the stadium, as well as dancing pioneer settlers as two trains came together on, symbolizing the u.s. railroad industry which was beneficial to utah's economy beginning in the 1860s, as well as economically linking the western u.s. and the eastern u.s. at the end of their performance, the performers unfurled a giant quilt that covered the entire stadium floor with the 2002 winter olympics logo in the center.[36] two figure skaters, olympians kristi yamaguchi and scott hamilton performed on the oversized ice rink as "light the fire within", the 2002 winter olympic's theme song was sung by leann rimes.[36]
after speeches by jacques rogge, president over the ioc and mitt romney, the ceo of the salt lake organizing committee, the olympic flame, which had traveled 13,500 miles (21,700 km) was carried into the stadium by gold medalists dorothy hamill and dick button. they passed the flame to other pairs u.s. olympic heroes, who either ran or skated their short relay. gold medalists in nagano 1998 picabo street and cammi granato carried the flame up the steps to the towering cauldron where they were met by mike eruzione, captain of the miracle on ice hockey team that won the olympic gold medal in 1980. eruzione summoned the other members of the team, who together lit the olympic cauldron.[37] the opening ceremony would win seven emmy awards.[36]
the president opened the games standing among the us athletes, while previous heads of state opened the games from an official box. nbc's bob costas applauded the move during the network's coverage of the opening ceremony.
the official box was occupied by the president's olympic delegation:
the 2002 olympic emblem is a snowflake, which consisted of three separate sections. the yellow top section symbolizes the olympic flame, and represents the athletes' courage. the orange center section symbolizes the ancient weaving styles of utah's native americans, and represents the region's culture. the blue/purple bottom section symbolizes a snow-capped mountain, and represents the contrast of utah's mountain and desert areas. the orange/yellow colors above the blue/purple bottom section also gave the appearance of a sun rising from behind a mountain.
an official palette of colors, which ranged from cool blues to warm reds and oranges, was created for salt lake 2002. the palette became part of the official design theme named land of contrast – fire and ice, with the blues representing the cooler, snowy, mountainous regions of northern utah, and the oranges and red representing the warmer, rugged, red-rock areas of southern utah.[39]
as with all olympic games, pictograms, which easily identified the venues, sports, and services for spectators without using a written language, were specifically designed for salt lake 2002. the pictograms for these games mimicked the designs of branding-irons found in the western united states, and used the fire and ice theme colors of the salt lake 2002 games. the line thickness and 30-degree angles found in the pictograms mirror those found in the snowflake emblem.[39]
the mascots represent three of the indigenous animals of the western united states, and are named after natural resources which have long been important to utah's economy, survival, and culture. all three animals are major characters in the legends of local native americans, and each mascot wears a charm around its neck with an original anasazi or fremont-style petroglyph.
the 2002 olympic torch is modeled after an icicle, with a slight curve to represent speed and fluidity. the torch measures 33 inches (84 cm) long, 3 inches (7.6 cm) wide at the top, 0.5 inches (1.3 cm) at the bottom, and was designed by axiom design of salt lake city.[40][41] it was created with three sections, each with its own meaning and representation.[40]
the torch relay was a 65-day run, from december 4, 2001 to february 8, 2002, which carried the olympic flame through 46 of the 50 states in the united states.[42] the torch covered 13,500 miles (21,700 km), passed through 300 communities, and was carried by 12,012 torchbearers.[42]
the olympic cauldron was designed with the official motto light the fire within and the fire and ice theme in mind. it was designed to look like an icicle, and was made of glass which allowed the fire to be seen burning within. the actual glass cauldron stands atop a twisting glass and steel support, is 12 feet (3.7 m) high, and the flame within burns at 900 °f (482.2 °c).[43] together with its support the cauldron stands 117 feet (36 m) tall and was made of 738 individual pieces of glass. small jets send water down the glass sides of the cauldron, both to keep the glass and metal cooled (so they would not crack or melt), and to give the effect of melting ice.[44] the cauldron was designed by wet design of los angeles, its frame built by arrow dynamics of clearfield, utah, and its glass pieces created by western glass of ogden, utah. the cauldron's cost was 2 million dollars, and it was unveiled to the public during its original install at rice-eccles stadium (2002 olympic stadium) on january 8, 2002.[45] following the completion of the 2002 winter olympics the cauldron was installed at the permanent salt lake 2002 olympic cauldron park, next the 2002 olympic stadium in salt lake city.
a second olympic cauldron burned at the awards plaza in downtown salt lake city during the games. it was known as the hero's cauldron and was in the backdrop of every awards ceremony.
orf
seven network
cbc
cctv
dr1
ebu, eurosport
yle
tf1, france televisions
zdf, ard
rai
nos
nrk
stv1
srg ssr
bbc
nbc (ksl-tv)
public transportation has expanded greatly due to hosting the olympics. the biggest project that has been completed is trax (light rail) which is used by many locals to this day. other expansions include widened freeways and roadways throughout the city. trax also includes a line that has now extended to the airport making transit easier for tourists and visitors. one article from the salt lake tribune[46] states that 37% of locals use trax to commute daily while 25% of travelers within the city use this service. this is a direct result of holding the olympic games in salt lake city and just one of the many positive economic effects on the city.
the 2002 winter olympics brought a massive amount of success to the utah skiing industry. since hosting the winter games, utah has seen a 42% increase in skier and snowboarder visits as of 2010[update]–11. this increase resulted in direct expenditures from skiers and snowboarders growing 67% from $704 million in 2002–2003 to $1.2 billion in 2010–2011.[47]
in preparation for the winter games 14 venues were constructed or expanded. the utah olympic park was one of the venues constructed for the games. the olympic park has proven to be one of the most successful venues to date because it has been maintained in top competition form. due to the routine maintenance of the park utah has been able to host a large number of winter competitions since 2002. some of these events include, more than 60 world cup events, as well as seven world championships, including the fis freestyle skiing world cup and various other sporting events. hosting these various events has resulted in approximately $1 billion being pushed into the economy.[48] during 2013–2014 utah held 16 various winter sport competitions bringing $27.3 million to the economy of the utah.[49] after holding the olympics, utah became home to two national governing bodies of sport.[50] the united states ski and snowboard association is headquartered in park city, utah and the u.s. olympic speed skating team is based out of the utah olympic oval.
in 2017, an exploratory committee was formed to consider whether salt lake city should bid to host the olympics for a second time in 2026 or 2030.[51]
on december 14, 2018 salt lake city got the green light to bid for a future winter olympics.[52]
the university of utah was one of the hosts of the 2002 winter olympics, the planning committee approached the university of utah and asked them to build several student dormitories which would serve as athletes' accommodation during the games. it was agreed that the university would pay approximately $98 million out of the total required amount of $110 million in order to complete the construction. students of the university have benefited as almost 3,500 of them would be housed here after the games. this was a great economic benefit to the university since the amount of money used to complete such dormitories could take long to be afforded. apart from that, the university was also asked to expand rice eccles stadium to accommodate 50,000 people up from 32,000. the university would then be refunded almost $59 million and be given an extra $40 million for its maintenance.[53] it is worth noting that the u.s. team involved in the 2010 winter olympics lived in the university of utah's housing to use the stadium because of its facilities.
the 2002 olympic games also benefited the university economically since the salt lake 2002 olympic cauldron park was elevated by the renovations that took place. ice rinks were very scarce in utah, but due to the olympic games, they became plentiful and offered several entertainment and training opportunities for hockey players and figure skaters. the cauldron park located at the university of utah which was built with $6.5 million in profits and had the following features: a visitors' center which had a theater that showed a thrilling movie about the olympic games of 2002 and a "park" which had a dazzling pool and a v-shaped stone wall with the names of all the medalists of the 2002 olympic games. besides, the park had 17 plates which hung on the fence of the stadium celebrating the highlights of each day of the olympics. all these features acted as tourist attraction that boosted the economic development of the university. it is indicated that the approximate value of media exposure through print during the games was equated to $22.9 million. mainly, this was a huge economic benefit to the university as more and more people got to know about the educational establishment, and this also boosted enrollment and future development.
holger preuss in his book the economics of staging the olympics: a comparison of the games 1972–2008 argues that "the export of the 'olympic games' service results in an inflow of funds to the host city, causing additional production which, in its turn, leads to employment and income effects."[54] according to the study "2002 olympic winter games, economic, demographic and fiscal impacts", the estimated creation of new job years of employment was 35,424, and additional earnings of $1,544,203,000.[55] it was noted that the increase of olympic related job started in 1996 and continued until 2003. these effects can be estimated on the ground of historical relationship between job and corresponding population growth. a lot of people migrated into the future place of the olympic games for expanding and favorable employment opportunities that the olympics ensured. although many of the higher paying jobs created by the games were occupied by residents, many of the vacated jobs were filled by immigrants who relocated for the better employment opportunities.
basically, the immigration rate was even larger because the employees immigrated with their families. the additional people paid diverse taxes and fees from their income that created additional revenue on the state and local levels.
olympic related jobs in utah started in 1996 with slight job opportunities of less than 100. however, from the job measurement conducted from 1996 to 2002, steady attainment of job opportunities established and a maximum level was noted in 2001 where there were 12,500 job opportunities attained yearly, and approximately 25,070 jobs created in 2002.[56] therefore, from 1996 to 2002 the sum of employment equated to 35,000 jobs which lasted a year. february 2002, it is when the highest employment opportunities were created compared to other years. there were around 25,070 job opportunities created compared to 35,000 created from 1996–2001.
it is difficult to quantify the impact of the 2002 olympics on the unemployment rates in utah, due mostly to the effect of the early 2000s recession. in 1996, the unemployment rate in utah was approximately 3.4% while the u.s. national average was 5.4% and by the end of 2001, the unemployment rate in utah was around 4.8% while the national average had risen to 5.7%.[57] there was a high percentage of visitors to the games, which raised the number of tourists whose consumption and demand prompted the establishment of job opportunities to meet the demands.
the alcohol laws of utah are known for being some of the most restrictive alcohol laws in the country however having the olympic games in salt lake helped state officials ease up on a few different laws concerning alcohol in the state of utah which has helped the nightlife grow and helped more bars and restaurants increase revenues by simply improving the accessibility of alcohol to customers.[citation needed]
during the olympics, alcohol regulations were not changed to accommodate people coming in from outside utah to watch and take part in the games. officials from the olympics as well as visitors complained about the unreasonable laws. shortly after in 2003 the tide began to turn and some of the restrictive laws were altered. the charge to join a "private club" or what is essentially a bar with a membership fee was lowered from five dollars to four dollars. additionally, they allowed existing members or "sponsors" seven guests instead of five. the maximum amount of alcohol permitted with any one drink from a bar increased from 2 to 2.75 ounces.[58] beer licenses were also expanded to allow restaurants to serve wine as well with their beer license. finally, people were now allowed to have more than one drink with them at their table.
this loosening of laws lowered the bar for entry into a bar in salt lake city. changing demographics, due in large part to the olympics, disrupted the number of people looking to drink as more non-mormons began to settle in utah. travelers have also increased due to the olympics and account for a share of the increase in liquor sales since the games. according to the salt lake tribune: sales at utah's 125 liquor outlets shows a 153 percent increase in liquor sales since 2002, from $156.2 million to $396 million. even adjusted for inflation, sales have nearly doubled, and per capita spending on alcohol has grown by more than 50 percent.[59]
there was a scandal involving allegations of bribery used to win the rights to host the 2002 winter olympics in salt lake city. prior to its successful bid in 1995, the city had attempted four times to secure the games, failing each time. in 1998 members of the international olympic committee (ioc) were accused of taking bribes from the salt lake organizing committee (sloc) during the bidding process. the allegations resulted in the expulsion of several ioc members, and the adoption of new ioc rules. legal charges were brought against the leaders of salt lake's bid committee by the united states department of justice.[60] investigations were also launched into prior bidding process by other cities, finding that members of the ioc received bribes during the bidding process for both the 1998 winter olympics and 2000 summer olympics.[61] in response to the scandal, mitt romney was hired as the new president and ceo of the salt lake organizing committee.
the 2002 games were the first winter olympics held after formation of the world anti-doping agency; as a result there were a large number of athletes disqualified following the new testing.[62]
athletes in cross-country skiing were disqualified for various reasons, including doping by two russians and one spaniard, leading russia to file protests and threaten to withdraw from the competition.
in the first week of the games, a controversy in the pairs' figure skating competition culminated in the french judge's scores being thrown out and the canadian team of jamie salé and david pelletier being awarded a gold medal (together with the russians who were controversially awarded gold previously and kept their medals despite the allegations of vote swapping and buying the votes of the french judge).  allegations of bribery were leveled against many ice-skating judges, leading to the arrest of known criminal alimzhan tokhtakhounov in italy (at the request of the united states). he was released by the italian officials.[63]
these olympic games were the first since september 11, 2001, which meant a higher level of security than ever before provided for the games. the office of homeland security (ohs) designated the olympics a national special security event (nsse).
aerial surveillance and radar control was provided by the u.s. marines of marine air control squadron 2, detachment c, from cherry point, north carolina.
according to the wall street journal, the fbi and nsa arranged with qwest communications to use intercept equipment for a period of less than six months around the time of the 2002 winter olympics.[64]
when he spoke during the opening ceremonies, jacques rogge, presiding over his first olympics as the ioc president, told the athletes of the united states:[65]
your nation is overcoming a horrific tragedy, a tragedy that has affected the whole world. we stand united with you in the promotion of our common ideals and hope for world peace.
notes
citations

the 2006 winter olympics, officially known as the xx olympic winter games (italian: xx giochi olimpici invernali) and commonly known as turin 2006 or torino 2006, was a winter multi-sport event which was held in turin, piedmont, italy from february 10 to 26, 2006. this marked the second time that italy had hosted the winter olympic games, the first being the 1956 winter olympics in cortina d'ampezzo. italy also hosted the summer olympics in 1960 in rome. turin was selected as the host city for the 2006 games in june 1999.
the official motto of the xx olympic winter games was "passion lives here".[1] the official logo depicts a stylized profile of the mole antonelliana building, drawn in white and blue ice crystals, signifying the snow and the sky. the crystal web was also meant to portray the web of new technologies and the olympic spirit of community. the olympic mascots of the games were neve ("snow" in italian), a female snowball, and gliz, a male ice cube.[2] italy will host the 2026 winter olympics in milan and cortina d'ampezzo 20 years after these games.
turin was chosen as the host of the olympics on june 19, 1999, at the 109th ioc session in seoul, south korea.[3] this was after the ioc had adopted new election procedures during the 108th extraordinary ioc session in light of the controversies surrounding the votes for the 1998 and 2002 winter olympics.[4]
since ioc members were forbidden from visiting the candidate cities (in the interests of reducing bribery), the 109th ioc session elected a special body, the selection college, to choose finalist cities from the pool of candidate cities after each had made their final presentations to the full ioc session.
the full ioc session then voted on the cities chosen as finalist cities by the selection college. although six cities launched candidacies and made presentations to the full ioc session, the selection college chose only two cities to go forward to be voted upon by the full ioc session: sion and turin.[3] the candidacies of helsinki, finland; poprad-tatry, slovakia; zakopane, poland; and klagenfurt, austria were dropped by the selection college after all six candidate cities made their candidate presentations.[5]
the selection of turin over sion came as a surprise, since sion was the overwhelming favorite in part because the ioc is based in switzerland.[6] turin's selection came two years after rome's unsuccessful 2004 summer olympics bid. those games were ultimately awarded to athens, greece.[7]
the information below comes from the international olympic committee vote history web page.
the oxford olympics study established the outturn cost of the torino 2006 winter olympics at us$4.4 billion in 2015-dollars and cost overrun at 80% in real terms.[10] this includes sports-related costs only, that is, (i) operational costs incurred by the organizing committee for the purpose of staging the games, e.g., expenditures for technology, transportation, workforce, administration, security, catering, ceremonies, and medical services, and (ii) direct capital costs incurred by the host city and country or private investors to build, e.g., the competition venues, the olympic village, international broadcast center, and media and press center, which are required to host the games. indirect capital costs are not included, such as for road, rail, or airport infrastructure, or for hotel upgrades or other business investment incurred in preparation for the games but not directly related to staging the games. the cost and cost overrun for torino 2006 compares with costs of us$2.5 billion and a cost overrun of 13% for vancouver 2010, and costs of us$51 billion and a cost overrun of 289% for sochi 2014, the latter being the most costly olympics to date. average cost for winter games since 1960 is us$3.1 billion, average cost overrun is 142%.
the 2006 winter olympics featured 84 medal events over 15 disciplines in 7 sports.[11] events that made their olympic debut in turin included mass start biathlon, team sprint cross-country skiing, snowboard cross and team pursuit speed skating.[12] most of the cross-country skiing events at these games involved different distances from those at the previous winter games in 2002. the classical men's 50 km and women's 30 km distances, which were held at salt lake 2002, were not included in these games, as these events were alternated with freestyle events of the same distances.[13]
the following list shows the sports and disciplines that were contested at the 2006 games.
numbers in parentheses indicate the number of medal events contested in each separate discipline.
the top ten listed nocs by number of gold medals are listed below.
  host country (italy)
to sort this table by nation, total medal count, or any other column, click on the  icon next to the column title.
stefania belmondo, a 10-time olympic medalist in cross-country skiing, lit the olympic flame during the opening ceremony on february 10. before that, the ceremony celebrated the best of italy and sport including a segment honoring the alps. the filmmaster group k-events (from march 2012: filmmaster events) created and produced the opening and closing ceremonies of the xx winter olympic games in turin in 2006. executive producer marco balich, content supervisor alfredo accatino, art direction lida castelli.  monica maimone of studio festi directed the section from renaissance to baroque, part of the opening ceremony.[14][15]
the first gold medal of the 2006 games was awarded in the 20 kilometre biathlon, won by german michael greis on the first day of competition. ice hockey began with the women's competition; sweden defeated russia 3–1 in the first match while canada's team opened with the second most lopsided win in olympic history by beating the host italians 16–0.
on february 12, latvia won its first winter olympic medal when mārtiņš rubenis took the bronze in the men's luge. armin zöggeler's win in that event gave italy its first gold medal of the games, and his fourth in a row.
chinese figure skating pair zhang dan and zhang hao, trailing a dominant russian pair, attempted a throw quadruple salchow jump—an element which had never been successfully completed in competition. zhang dan fell, injuring her knee, but the pair finished their program to a standing ovation and took the silver medal. russia finished the third day of competition with two gold medals, as did the united states.
the fourth day saw evgeni plushenko of russia set a world record score in the men's figure skating short program; his 90.66 points was more 10 points better than the nearest opponent's score. the men's combined alpine skiing was riddled with disqualifications, including front-runners bode miller and benjamin raich. american ted ligety won the event in what was considered an upset.
canada had another strong day on february 15, setting new olympic records in both men's and women's pursuit team speed skating events as well as opening the men's ice hockey competition with a win against italy. italy finished the day with the men's pursuit team olympic record, however, after the netherlands bettered canada's time only to have italy improve upon theirs. china won its first gold of 2006 with wang meng's victory in the women's individual 500-metre short track speed skating. a pair of austrian brothers andreas linger and wolfgang linger won the men's doubles luge while michaela dorfmeister gave the nation another championship in the women's downhill.
kristina šmigun won her second gold medal of the games with a victory in the women's 10 kilometre classical cross-country skiing on february 16, remaining the only estonian to medal. in men's curling action, great britain edged germany 7–6, switzerland kept new zealand winless by winning 9–7, canada beat norway 7–6, and the united states defeated sweden, 10–6. lgbt figure skater jeffrey buttle from canada won the bronze in the men's singles. it was the only medals for him and stéphane lambiel from switzerland.
on february 17, tanja frieden of switzerland took the gold in women's snowboard cross after lindsey jacobellis of the united states fell on the second-to-last jump while performing an unnecessary method grab. jacobellis settled for silver (she would have won gold if she didn't perform the grab), while canada's dominique maltais took bronze after recovering from a crash. duff gibson of canada took gold in the skeleton just ahead of fellow canadian jeff pain, becoming the oldest individual gold medalist in winter olympics history. rodney hiner of the united states took home the bronze. in the women's ice hockey semifinals, the united states lost a shootout to sweden.
kjetil andré aamodt won gold for norway in the men's super g on february 18, beating hermann maier of austria. germans kati wilhelm and martina glagow finished first and second in the 10 kilometre biathlon pursuit. the host italians defeated canada in men's curling, while switzerland did the same in men's ice hockey to put the canadians on the wrong end of two major upsets on the same day. the united states men's ice hockey team suffered its first loss of the tournament as slovakia and russia continue their dominance of the pool.
lascelles brown became the first jamaican-born competitor to win a medal at the winter olympics on february 19, competing on the canadian 2-man bobsleigh team which finished second in an extremely tight competition. the german pair was only .21 seconds ahead of the canadians, themselves only .14 ahead of the swiss team. finland continued to be unbeaten in men's ice hockey, handing canada its second loss.
the day also saw the most hyped event of these games, at least in europe, as the men's 10 km cross country relay was scheduled. the battle stemmed from the lillehammer games 12 years ago in which italy out-dueled norway in that very same event. to that extent, many norwegians wanted to win this event in order to embarrass the italians on their home turf, but it was not to be as italy crushed the field winning over germany by over 15 seconds to take their 5th straight gold in this event. norway failed to medal for the first time since 1988.
the final day of curling pool play was february 20; norway, sweden, switzerland, and canada advanced to the women's semifinals while finland, canada, the united states, and great britain qualified in the men's competition. austria took their first team gold medal in ski jumping, while canada took their second in women's ice hockey.
slovakia and finland both won their final men's ice hockey games on february 21 to win their respective pools with 5–0–0 records. enrico fabris gave the host nation another gold medal in speed skating by winning the men's 1500 metres.
on february 22, the twelfth day of competition, anja pärson won her first gold medal in the women's slalom; it was her fifth overall olympic medal and third of the 2006 games. chandra crawford took a quicker route to the top of the podium, winning the 1.1 kilometre cross-country sprint gold in her olympic debut. in the men's ice hockey quarterfinals, the previously undefeated slovaks lost to the czech republic while russia, finland, and sweden eliminated canada, the united states, and switzerland, respectively. philipp schoch successfully defended his snowboarding giant slalom gold against his brother simon.
sweden took the women's championship in the curling finals held on february 23. shizuka arakawa gave japan its first gold medal of the games and first figure skating gold medal, winning the ladies' figure skating competition in part by being able to finish without falling, as sasha cohen and irina slutskaya both tumbled. russia wrested the gold medal in women's team biathlon from germany.
february 24 was the day of the men's curling finals, in which canada won its first gold medal and the united states won its first medal in the sport as canada defeated finland and the united states beat great britain for the second time. the figure skating gala was also held, with top placers in all of the events performing exhibitions. sweden and finland won their men's ice hockey semifinal games, defeating the czech republic and russia.
the austrians swept the men's alpine slalom medals on february 25, led by benjamin raich. germany took gold medals in the men's 15 kilometer biathlon and the men's individual bobsleigh. apolo anton ohno won his second short track speed skating gold medal, with only somewhat less controversy than his first 4 years earlier. south korea's jin sun-yu wins her third gold of the games in the women's 1000 m. compatriot ahn hyun-soo wins his third gold medal of the games, medaling in every men's short track event and bringing his total number of medals in turin to four.
the final day of competition and the closing ceremony, were held on february 26. the swedish men's ice hockey team handed finland their first loss in the final to take the gold medal. in the closing ceremony, manuela di centa, a seven-time olympic medalist from italy and then-member of the international olympic committee, was scheduled to present the medals for the men's 50-kilometre cross-country skiing event. this resulted in her presenting the gold medal to her own brother when giorgio di centa won the event to take his second gold medal.
olympic events were mainly held in turin, but other events (namely skiing, snowboarding, and the track sports) were held in mountainous outlying villages for obvious reasons.
many venues were located in the olympic district in central turin, including:
a record 80 national olympic committees (nocs) entered athletes at the 2006 winter olympic games. this was an increase of two from the 78 represented at the 2002 olympic winter games. the number in parentheses indicates the number of participants that noc contributed.  it was the first appearance for albania, ethiopia and madagascar. it was the only appearance at the winter olympics for serbia and montenegro, coming between their change of name in 2003 and montenegro's vote for independence in may.
out of 40,000 applicants, 20,000 volunteers were selected to help the athletes, spectators, and journalists, and to prepare the competition sites. they were selected by the recruiting program noi2006.[16]
sixty-five sporting facilities, various infrastructures, sport villages for athletes and media, and transportation infrastructures were constructed for a total of 1.7 billion euros.[17]
among the most important sporting facilities that were used:
the most important transport infrastructure works were:
in the city, the main developments were the palafuksas, a glass building designed by massimiliano fuksas, the new modern art gallery and the great project of the "spina", that will provide urban regeneration over an area of 2 million square meters through the construction of an underground urban railway and the re-utilization of abandoned industrial areas.
the 2006 winter olympic games were broadcast worldwide by a number of television broadcasters:
the games had issues with costs covering and international attendance. due to a lack of funding by the italian government, toroc risked dissolution. american skier bode miller was also a focus of controversy in his home country and canada, where his actions were not considered in line with the olympic spirit.[32]
the metro was finally opened to the public on february 4, 2006, after a 45-day delay. it operated on a shorter stretch (xviii dicembre (porta susa) to fermi – 11 stations) than originally forecast; it finally reached the main railway station (porta nuova) and the rest of the city centre more than one year after the games, in october 2007. for the duration of the games, a single ticket (5 euros) covered use of both the metro and other means of public transportation for a whole day. however, during the games, metro service stopped at 6:00 pm, making it impractical for spectators of evening events. furthermore, the metro did not reach any of the olympic venues. on the other hand, the bus service was heavily improved for the games, although still inadequate at night hours.[citation needed]
during the games, italian police raided the austrian athletes' quarters in search of evidence of blood doping. the raid was conducted due to suspicions over the presence of biathlon coach walter mayer, who had been banned from all olympic events up to and including the vancouver olympic games in 2010 due to previous doping convictions. around the time of the raid mayer and two austrian biathletes, wolfgang perner and wolfgang rottmann, tried to escape and fled back to austria. later, the austrian ski federation president said that the two athletes told him they "may have used illegal methods". six skiers and four biathletes were also taken for drug screens by the ioc.[33] those substance screens later returned negative results.
on 25 april 2007, six austrian athletes (roland diethard, johannes eder, wolfgang perner, jürgen pinter, wolfgang rottmann and martin tauber) were banned for life from the olympics for their involvement in the doping scandal at the 2006 turin olympics, the first time the ioc punished athletes without a positive or missed doping test. the austrians were found guilty of possessing doping substances and taking part in a conspiracy, based on materials seized by italian police during the raid on the living quarters. the austrians also had their competition results from turin annulled.[34]
list of athletes with doping convictions in these games:
the ioc has retested nearly 500 doping samples that were collected at the 2006 turin games. in 2014, the estonian olympic committee was notified by the ioc that a retested sample from cross-country skier kristina šmigun had tested positive. on 24 october 2016, the world anti-doping agency athletes' commission stated that šmigun, who won two gold medals at the turin games, faces a court of arbitration for sport hearing before the end of october. if šmigun were to be stripped of her gold medals, kateřina neumannová of czech republic could be elevated to gold in the 7.5 + 7.5 km double pursuit event. marit bjørgen of norway could acquire a seventh gold medal in the 10 km classical event.[37]
a number of events reported low spectator attendance despite having acceptable ticket sales. preliminary competition and locally less popular sports failed to attract capacity crowd as expected. organizers explained this was because blocks of seats were reserved or purchased by sponsors and partners who later did not show up at the events.[citation needed]
several news organizations reported that many americans were not as interested in the olympics as in years past.[38] it has been suggested that reasons for this lack of interest include the tape delayed coverage, which showed events in prime-time as much as 18 hours later in the western united states, and also due to the lack of success achieved by big-name american athletes.[39]  primetime viewing figures in canada were also disappointing, especially after the early exit of the canadian men's hockey team,[40] though overall viewing figures were up from 2002.[41]
the olympics represented an opportunity to revamp the city's look and change its traditional image as an industrial city by showing the world its hidden side of vibrant cultural life and stunning architectures.
thanks to the olympic exposure and state of the art venues, turin has become one of italy's primary tourist destinations and has been established as an important sport center in europe.[42]
since 2006, top (torino olympic park) has been the agency in charge of managing the olympic facilities.
as with every olympics since the munich massacre at the 1972 summer olympics and increasingly since the salt lake 2002 winter olympics in the aftermath of the september 11 attacks, there was heavy security due to fears of terrorism.
the organizers further increased security measures[43] in connection with the jyllands-posten muhammad cartoons controversy and insisted that the olympic games were going to be safe, which they were; the olympics concluded without a major breach of security occurring.

the 2010 winter olympics, officially known as the xxi olympic winter games (french: les xxies jeux olympiques d'hiver) and commonly known as vancouver 2010, informally the 21st winter olympics, was an international winter multi-sport event that was held from 12 to 28 february 2010 in vancouver, british columbia, canada, with some events held in the surrounding suburbs of richmond, west vancouver and the university endowment lands, and in the nearby resort town of whistler.
approximately 2,600 athletes from 82 nations participated in 86 events in fifteen disciplines.[1] both the olympic and paralympic games were organized by the vancouver organizing committee (vanoc), headed by john furlong. the 2010 winter olympics were the third olympics hosted by canada and the first by the province of british columbia. canada hosted the 1976 summer olympics in montreal, quebec, and the 1988 winter olympics in calgary, alberta. metro vancouver is the  largest metropolitan area to host the winter olympics, although calgary is the largest city to host the winter olympics. they will both be surpassed by beijing in 2022.
following olympic tradition, the incumbent mayor of vancouver sam sullivan received the olympic flag during the closing ceremony of the 2006 winter olympics in turin, italy. the flag was raised on february 28, 2006, in a special ceremony and was on display at vancouver city hall until the olympic opening ceremony. the event was officially opened by governor general michaëlle jean,[2] who was accompanied by the canadian prime minister stephen harper and international olympic committee president jacques rogge.[3]
for the first time, canada won gold in an official sport at an olympic games hosted at home, having failed to do so at both the 1976 summer olympics in montreal and the 1988 winter olympics in calgary (although canada won the woman's curling event in calgary when it was still only a demonstration sport).[4] canada clinched their first gold medal on the second day of the competition and first topped the gold medal tally on the second to last day of competition and went on to become the first host nation since norway in 1952 to lead the gold medal count.[5] with 14, canada broke the record for the most gold medals won at a single winter olympics, which was 13, set by the soviet union in 1976 and norway in 2002.[6] the united states won the most medals in total, their second time doing so at the winter olympics, and broke the record for the most medals won at a single winter olympics with 37, a record held up to then by germany in 2002 with 36 medals.[5] athletes from slovakia[7] and belarus[8] won the first winter olympic gold medals for their nations.
the canadian olympic association chose vancouver as the canadian candidate city over calgary, which sought to re-host the games and quebec city, which had lost the 2002 olympic bid in 1995. on the first round of voting on november 21, 1998, vancouver-whistler had 26 votes, quebec city had 25 and calgary had 21. on december 3, 1998, the second and final round of voting occurred between the two leading contenders, which saw vancouver win with 40 votes compared to quebec city's 32 votes. vancouver had also previously bid for the 1976 games, which were first awarded to denver, then to innsbruck and the 1980 games, which were awarded to lake placid.
after the bribery scandal over the candidacy of the salt lake city bid for the 2002 winter olympics (which resulted in quebec city asking for compensation (c$8 million) for its unsuccessful bid),[9] many of the rules of the bidding process were changed in 1999. the international olympic committee (ioc) created the evaluation commission, which was appointed on october 24, 2002. prior to the bidding for the 2008 summer olympics, host cities would often fly members of the ioc to their city where they toured the city and were provided with gifts. the lack of oversight and transparency often led to allegations of money for votes. afterward, changes brought forth by the ioc bidding rules were tightened, and more focused on technical aspects of candidate cities. the team analyzed the candidate city features and provided its input back to the ioc.
vancouver won the bid to host the olympics by a vote of the international olympic committee on july 2, 2003, at the 115th ioc session held in prague, czech republic. the result was announced by ioc president jacques rogge.[10] vancouver faced two other finalists shortlisted that same february: pyeongchang, south korea, and salzburg, austria. pyeongchang had the most votes of the three cities in the first round of voting, in which salzburg was eliminated. in the run-off, all but two of the members who had voted for salzburg voted for vancouver. it was the closest vote by the ioc since sydney, australia beat beijing for the 2000 summer olympics by two votes. vancouver's victory came almost two years after toronto's 2008 summer olympic bid was defeated by beijing in a landslide vote.
the vancouver olympic committee (vanoc) spent c$16.6 million on upgrading facilities at cypress mountain, which hosted the freestyle (aerials, moguls, ski cross) and snowboarding events. with the opening in february 2009 of the c$40 million vancouver olympic/paralympic centre at hillcrest park, which hosted curling, every sports venue for the 2010 games was completed on time and at least one year prior to the games.[11][12]
in 2004, the operational cost of the 2010 winter olympics was estimated to be canadian $1.354 billion (about £828,499,787, €975,033,598 or us$1,314,307,896). as of mid-2009 it was projected to be c$1.76 billion,[13] mostly raised from non-government sources,[13] primarily through sponsorships and the auction of national broadcasting rights. c$580 million was the taxpayer-supported budget to construct or renovate venues throughout vancouver and whistler. a final audit conducted by pricewaterhousecoopers released in december 2010 revealed total operation cost to have been $1.84 billion and came in on budget resulting in neither surplus nor deficit. construction of venues also came on budget with a total cost of $603 million.[14]
pricewaterhousecoopers' study estimated a total contribution to the bc economy of $2.3 billion of gross domestic product, and as well creating 45,000 jobs and contributing an additional $463 million to the tourism industry while venue construction by vanoc and 3rd parties added $1.22 billion to the economy, far short of the $10 billion forecast by premier gordon campbell. the study also said that hosting the olympics was one of many reasons why the provincial debt grew by $24 billion during the decade. non direct olympics games cost (e.g. expanded rail network, highways, security, paid time off for government employees "volunteering"  etc.) cost in excess of 7 billion.[15]  in 2011, the provincial auditor-general declined to conduct a post-games audit.[16]
c$200 million was expected to be spent for security, which was organized through a special body, the integrated security unit, of which the royal canadian mounted police (rcmp) was the lead agency; other government agencies such as the vancouver police department, canada border services agency, canadian forces, and police agencies across canada. the canadian security intelligence service (csis) also played a role. that number was later revealed to be in the region of c$1 billion, an amount in excess of five times what was originally estimated.[17]
some venues, including the richmond olympic oval, were at sea level, a rarity for the winter games.[18] the 2010 games were also the first—winter or summer—to have had an opening ceremony held indoors.[19] greater vancouver was the most populous metropolitan area ever to hold the winter games.[20] in february, the month when the games were held, vancouver has an average temperature of 4.8 °c (40.6 °f).[21] the average temperature as measured at vancouver international airport was 7.1 °c (44.8 °f) for the month of february 2010.[22]
the opening and closing ceremonies were held at bc place stadium, which received over c$150 million in major renovations. competition venues in greater vancouver included the pacific coliseum, the vancouver olympic/paralympic centre, the ubc winter sports centre, the richmond olympic oval and cypress mountain. gm place, now known as rogers arena, played host to ice hockey events, being renamed canada hockey place for the duration of the games since corporate sponsorship is not allowed for an olympic venue.[23] renovations included the removal of advertising from the ice surface and conversion of some seating to accommodate the media.[23] the 2010 winter olympics marked the first time an olympic hockey game was played on a rink sized according to nhl rules instead of international specifications. competition venues in whistler included whistler creekside at the whistler blackcomb ski resort, the whistler olympic park, the whistler celebration plaza and the whistler sliding centre.
the 2010 winter games marked the first time that the energy consumption of the olympic venues was tracked in real time and made available to the public. energy data was collected from the metering and building automation systems of nine of the olympic venues and was displayed online through the venue energy tracker project.[24]
the olympic games in vancouver were broadcast worldwide by a number of television broadcasters. as rights for the 2010 games have been packaged with those for the 2012 summer olympics, broadcasters were largely identical for both events.
the host broadcaster was olympic broadcasting services vancouver, a subsidiary of the ioc's new in-house broadcasting unit olympic broadcasting services (obs). the 2010 olympics marked the first games where the host broadcasting facilities were provided solely by obs.[25] the executive director of olympic broadcasting services vancouver was nancy lee, a former producer and executive for cbc sports.[26]
in canada, the games were the first olympic games broadcast by a new olympic broadcast media consortium led by ctvglobemedia and rogers media, displacing previous broadcaster cbc sports. main english-language coverage was shown on the ctv television network, while supplementary programming was mainly shown on tsn and rogers sportsnet. main french-language coverage was shown on v and rds.[27]
in the united states, associated press (ap) announced that it would send 120 reporters, photographers, editors and videographers to cover the games on behalf of the country's news media.[28]  the cost of their olympics coverage prompted ap to make a "real departure for the wire service's online coverage". rather than simply providing content, it partnered with more than 900 newspapers and broadcasters who split the ad revenue generated from an ap-produced multi-media package of video, photos, statistics, stories and a daily webcast.[28]  ap's coverage included a microsite with web widgets facilitating integration with social networking and bookmarking services.[29]
on nbc, bob costas hosted the primetime telecast, while al michaels did so during the day. together they co-hosted nbc's coverage of the  closing ceremony.
in france, the games were covered by france télévisions, which included continuous live coverage on its website.[30]
the official broadcast theme for the olympic broadcasting services host broadcast was a piece called "city of ice" composed by rob may and simon hill.[31]
the olympic torch relay is the transfer of the olympic flame from ancient olympia, greece — where the first olympic games were held thousands of years ago — to the stadium of the city hosting the current olympic games. the flame arrives just in time for the opening ceremony.
for the vancouver 2010 olympic winter games, the flame was lit in olympia on october 22, 2009.[32] it then traveled from greece, over the north pole to canada's high arctic and on to the west coast and vancouver. the relay started its long canada journey from the british columbia capital of victoria. in canada, the torch traveled approximately 45,000 kilometres (28,000 mi) over 106 days, making it the longest relay route within one country in olympic history. the olympic torch was carried by approximately 12,000 canadians and reached over 1,000 communities.[33][34]
celebrity torchbearers included arnold schwarzenegger,[35] steve nash,[36] matt lauer,[37] justin morneau,[38] michael bublé,[39] bob costas,[40] shania twain,[41] and hockey greats including sidney crosby,[42] wayne gretzky,[43] and the captains of the two vancouver canucks teams that went to the stanley cup finals: trevor linden (1994)[44] and stan smyl (1982).[45]
82 national olympic committees (noc) entered teams in the 2010 winter olympics.[46] cayman islands, colombia, ghana, montenegro, pakistan, peru and serbia made their winter olympic debuts. also jamaica, mexico and morocco returned to the games after missing the turin games. tonga sought to make its winter olympic debut by entering a single competitor in luge, attracting some media attention, but he crashed in the final round of qualifying.[47]
luxembourg qualified two athletes[48] but did not participate because one did not reach the criteria set by the noc[49] and the other was injured[50] before the games. below is a map of the participating nations and a list of the nations with the number of competitors indicated in brackets.[51]
the 2010 winter olympics featured 86 events over 15 disciplines in 7 sports.
numbers in parentheses indicate the number of medal events contested in each separate discipline.
the opening and closing ceremonies and the events categorized as ice sports (excluding bobsleigh, luge and skeleton) were held in vancouver and richmond. the sports categorized as "nordic events" were held in the callaghan valley located just to the west of whistler. all alpine skiing events were held on whistler mountain (creekside) and sliding events (bobsleigh, luge and skeleton) were held on blackcomb mountain. cypress mountain (located in cypress provincial park in west vancouver) hosted the freestyle skiing (aerials, moguls and ski cross), and all snowboard events (half-pipe, parallel giant slalom, snowboard cross).
vancouver 2010 was also the first winter olympics in which both men's and women's hockey were played on a narrower, nhl-sized ice rink,[52] measuring 200 ft × 85 ft (61 m × 26 m), instead of the international size of 200 ft × 98.5 ft (61.0 m × 30.0 m). the games were played at general motors place (now rogers arena), home of the nhl's vancouver canucks, which was temporarily renamed canada hockey place for the duration of the olympics. utilizing this existing venue instead of building a new international-sized ice rink facility saved $10 million in construction costs and allowed an additional 35,000 spectators to attend olympic hockey games.[52] however, some european countries expressed concern over this decision, worried that it might give north american players an advantage since they grew up playing on the smaller nhl-sized rinks.[53] by contrast, the only other nhl venue to host olympic hockey, the calgary flames' olympic saddledome, started construction before calgary won the bid for the 1988 winter olympics and it was designed to accommodate an international ice rink.
there were a number of events that were proposed to be included in the 2010 winter olympics.[54] on november 28, 2006, the ioc executive board at their meeting in kuwait voted to include ski cross in the official program.[55] the vancouver olympic committee (vanoc) subsequently approved the event to officially be part of the games program.[56]
events proposed for inclusion but ultimately rejected included:[57]
the issue over women's ski jumping being excluded ended up in the supreme court of british columbia in vancouver during april 21–24, 2009, with a verdict on july 10 excluding women's ski jumping from the 2010 games.[58] a request to appeal that verdict to the supreme court of canada was subsequently denied on december 22 – a decision that marked the end of any hopes that the event would be held during vancouver 2010.[59] to alleviate the exclusion, vanoc organizers invited women from all over canada to participate at whistler olympic park, including continental cup in january 2009.[58] women's ski jumping was included in the 2014 winter olympics in sochi, russia.
in the following calendar for the 2010 winter olympic games, each blue box indicates that an event competition, such as a qualification round, was held on that day. the yellow boxes represent days during which medal-awarding finals for a sport were held with the number in these boxes representing the number of finals that were contested on that day.[60]
the top ten listed nocs by number of gold medals are listed below. the host nation, canada, is highlighted.
  host country (canada)
to sort this table by nation, total medal count, or any other column, click on the  icon next to the column title.
some in the foreign press, including london 2012 organizers, had criticized the lack of city decorations to acknowledge that vancouver was the host of the games. the original plans to decorate the city in olympic colours, a tradition followed by other recent games host cities, were canceled for several reasons. anti-games activists repeatedly vandalized the existing 2010 olympics monuments such as the countdown clock, forcing the city to install cctv cameras, and adding more games decorations would have inevitably required more security presence to deter protesters, so vanoc opted to minimize these symbols to avoid making the city a police state. besides local opposition, budget cutbacks also forced the organizers to scale back on the elaborate plans.[61]
vanoc initially benefited from an economic boom and was able to secure lucrative and record domestic sponsorships, but this boom also resulted in rapidly rising construction and labour costs. due to these factors, as well as the late 2000s financial crisis and economic recession, vanoc built minimalistic functional venues with little aesthetic appeal though they were well-designed for post-games usage. this approach, as well as the fact that most of the infrastructure already existed, meant that the direct costs of the vancouver games were much lower than recent olympic games.[61]
before the games began and as they commenced, a number of concerns and controversies surfaced and received media attention. hours before the opening ceremony, georgian luger nodar kumaritashvili was killed during a training run, intensifying questions about the safety of the course and prompting[62] organizers to implement quick modifications. officials concluded that it was an athlete error rather than a track deficiency.[63] the international luge federation called an emergency meeting after the accident, and all other training runs were cancelled for the day.[64] the president of georgia, mikheil saakashvili, thanked the hosts for the way that they handled kumaritashvili's death which included a moment of silence and a tribute to kumaritashvili at the opening ceremony.[65]
one critic[66]
questioned the choice of cypress mountain as a venue because of its potential lack of snow due to the 2009-10 el niño. because of this possibility, organizers had a contingency plan to truck in snow from manning park, about 250 kilometres (160 mi) to the east of the city. this allowed events to proceed as planned.[67]
political decisions involving cancellation of promised low-income housing and the creation of a community of mixed economic backgrounds for post-games use of the athletes' village was criticized.[68]
opening ceremonies were stalled while organizers dealt with mechanical problems during the cauldron lighting ceremony.[69] speed skating events were delayed due to breakdowns of the ice resurfacers supplied by olympia, an official sponsor of the games.[70]
thousands of tickets were voided by organizers when weather conditions made standing-room-only areas unsafe.[71] visitors were also upset that, as in past olympics, medal ceremonies required separate admission[71] and blocks of vip tickets reserved for sponsors and dignitaries were unused at events.[72] other glitches and complaints have included confusion by officials at the start of the february 16 men's and women's biathlon pursuit races, and restricted access to the olympic flame cauldron on the vancouver waterfront.[73][74]
opposition to the olympic games was expressed by activists and politicians, including lower mainland mayors derek corrigan[75]
and richard walton.[76] many of the public pre-olympic events held in vancouver were attended by protesters.[77]
on saturday, february 13, as part of a week-long anti-olympic convergence, protesters smashed windows of the downtown vancouver location of the hudson's bay department store.[78][79] protesters later argued that the hudson's bay company, "has been a symbol of colonial oppression for centuries" as well as a major sponsor of the 2010 olympics.[80]
some of the issues reflected in the opposition continue the themes identified in opposition to all olympic games, some of which are outlined in anti-olympics activist and professor of sociology helen jefferson lenskyj's books olympic industry resistance (2007) and inside the olympic industry (2000), which examined a number of different olympic games prior to the 2010 winter olympics.[81]
these issues of concern, underlying the opposition to any and all olympic games, include:
although the aboriginal governments of the squamish, musqueam, lil'wat and tsleil-waututh (the "four host first nations"), on whose traditional territory the games were held, signed a protocol in 2004[89] in support of the games,[90] there was opposition to the olympics from some indigenous groups and supporters. although the lil'wat branch of the st'at'imc nation is a co-host of the games, a splinter group from the seton band known as the st'at'imc of sutikalh, who have also opposed the cayoosh ski resort, feared the olympics would bring unwanted tourism and real estate sales to their territory.[91][92]
unrelated to the four host nations or other indigenous groups, members of the native warrior society removed the olympic flag from its flag-pole at vancouver city hall on march 6, 2007.[93]
local aboriginal people, as well as canadian inuit, initially expressed concern over the choice of an inukshuk as the symbol of the games, with some inuit leaders such as former nunavut commissioner peter irniq stating that the inukshuk is a culturally important symbol to them. he said that the "inuit never build inuksuit with head, legs and arms. i have seen inuksuit [built] more recently, 100 years maybe by non-inuit in nunavut, with head, legs and arms. these are not called inuksuit. these are called inunguat, imitation of man."[94] local aboriginal groups also expressed annoyance that the design did not reflect the coast salish and interior salish native culture from the region the games are being held in, but rather that of the inuit, who are indigenous to the arctic far from vancouver.
on march 11, 2010, it was reported that the polish cross country skier kornelia marek was tested positive for epo by the polish olympic committee. if found guilty of doping by the international olympic committee, marek and the relay teams would be disqualified and stripped of their vancouver results. she would also be banned from the next winter olympics in sochi, russia, in 2014.
marek denied taking any banned substances, but the backup "b" sample from the vancouver doping lab confirmed the "a" sample.[95]
on october 9, 2017, the ioc announced that three positive doping cases had been found from their re-analysis programme from the 2010 games. all three cases belonged to the same athlete, whose identity was not released at the time. the ioc had re-tested 1,195 urine samples from the games out of the 1,710 taken, which equates to 70%, as part of their re-analysis programme.[96]
weeks later, the athlete was confirmed to be slovenian biathlete teja gregorin.[97]
the massive celebratory crowds in downtown vancouver were highly praised by the ioc. jacques rogge, the president of ioc, indicated that "the way vancouver embraced these games was extraordinary. this is really something unique and has given a great atmosphere for these games."[98][99] the atmosphere surrounding the olympics, and its inclusion of foreign delegates and guests, was also praised, with many seasoned winter olympic observers putting the games at, or near, the top of the list of best ever winter olympics.[100]  they were also the best watched winter olympics since the 1994 olympics in lillehammer.[101] they are also mentioned alongside the sydney 2000 summer games in regards to the best atmosphere. a large part is credited to the citizens of vancouver and canada.[102]
some members of the media (mostly, and particularly the british media) criticized the own the podium and criticized the celebrations as having been somewhat nationalistic,[103][104] but this was not an opinion shared by many. some suggested that the british media were making these criticisms in order to make the upcoming 2012 summer olympics more appealing.[105] lord sebastian coe, chairman of the 2012 london olympic games organizing committee, attended the vancouver olympics to see how the city coped with the challenges of hosting. lord coe noted the games had "gradually recovered from its tumultuous start" and queried that he "never thought the british would find rivals in their preoccupation with the weather which is almost elevated to an olympic event" as he credited vanoc for meeting unforeseen challenges such as the unseasonably warm weather of cypress mountain. coe added "rarely have i seen a host city so passionate and so ready to embrace the games".[65][106]
the vancouver olympics also organized and hosted the first pride house for lgbt athletes in the history of the event.[107]
directly as a result of canada's medal performance at the 2010 olympics, the government of canada announced in the 2010 federal budget, a new commitment of $34 million over the next two years towards programs for athletes planning to compete in future olympics.[108]  this is in addition to the $11 million per year federal government commitment to the own the podium program.
also, as a result of hosting the 2010 olympics, the british columbia government pledged to restore funding for sports programs and athlete development to 2008 levels, which amounts to $30 million over three years.[109]
the arenas in which the games were held are open for the public to use. the richmond olympic oval has since been turned into an athletic centre.

the 2014 winter olympics, officially called the xxii olympic winter games (french: les xxiies jeux olympiques d'hiver) (russian: xxii олимпийские зимние игры, tr. xxii olimpiyskiye zimniye igry) and commonly known as sochi 2014, was an international winter multi-sport event that was held from 7 to 23 february 2014 in sochi, krasnodar krai, russia, with opening rounds in certain events held on the eve of the opening ceremony, 6 february 2014.
both the olympics and 2014 winter paralympics were organized by the sochi organizing committee (sooc). sochi was selected as the host city in july 2007, during the 119th ioc session held in guatemala city. it was the first olympics to be held in a cis state since the breakup of the soviet union in 1991. the soviet union was previously the host nation for the 1980 summer olympics in moscow. these were the first olympic games under the international olympic committee (ioc) presidency of thomas bach.
a record 98 events in fifteen winter sport disciplines were held during the games. a number of new competitions—a total of twelve accounting for gender—were held during the games, including biathlon mixed relay, women's ski jumping, mixed-team figure skating, mixed-team luge, half-pipe skiing, ski and snowboard slopestyle, and snowboard parallel slalom. the events were held around two clusters of new venues: an olympic park constructed in sochi's imeretinsky valley on the coast of the black sea, with fisht olympic stadium, and the games' indoor venues located within walking distance, and snow events in the resort settlement of krasnaya polyana.
the 2014 winter olympics were the most expensive games in the history of the olympics. while originally budgeted at us$12 billion, major cost overruns, caused this figure to expand to us$51 billion, more than three times the cost of the 2012 london olympics and even surpassing the estimated $44 billion cost of the 2008 summer olympics in beijing. the 2014 games achieved a record broadcast audience of 2.1 billion people worldwide.[1]
in 2016, an independent report commissioned by the world anti-doping agency confirmed allegations that the russian olympic team had been involved in a state-sponsored doping program, active from at least late-2011 through august 2015. the program was active during the winter olympics in sochi, and athletes had benefited from the cover-up.[2][3][4] the ioc stripped thirteen medals from russian athletes in 2017, but nine were reinstated by the court of arbitration for sport. in december 2017, the ioc voted to suspend the russian olympic committee, with an option for whitelisted athletes to compete independently during the 2018 winter olympics.[5][6]
sochi was elected on 4 july 2007 during the 119th international olympic committee (ioc) session held in guatemala city, guatemala, defeating bids from salzburg, austria; and pyeongchang, south korea.[7] this is the first time that the russian federation has hosted the winter olympics. the soviet union was the host of the 1980 summer olympics held in and around moscow.
as of october 2013, the estimated combined cost of the 2014 winter olympics had topped us$51 billion.[8] this amount included the cost for olympic games themselves and cost of sochi infrastructural projects (roads, railroads, power plants). this total is over four times the initial budget of $12 billion (compared to the $8 billion spent for the 2010 winter olympics in vancouver), and made the sochi games the most expensive olympics in history, exceeding the estimated $44 billion cost of the 2008 summer olympics in beijing,[9] which hosted 3 times as many events.[10] dmitry kozak was the main overseer for the events in sochi.[11][12][13]
in its final budget published in june 2014, olimpstroy—the state corporation that oversaw the sochi olympics development—reported the total allocated funds for the 2014 sochi winter olympics of 1,524 billion rubles (us$49.5 billion).[14] however, only about a fifth of that budget ($10.8 billion) was directly related to the olympic games, while the rest went into urban and regional regeneration and the conversion of the sochi region into an all-year round sea and alpine resort.[14] the breakdown table below is based on a report that has analyzed the distribution of olimpstroy's $49.5 billion budget. estimates also suggest that additional unrecoverable operational costs (including for security) could have added another $3 billion.[14]
olympic village (1100 places)
waste, security), planning and other works
and other infrastructure
with an average february temperature of 8.3 °c (42.8 °f) and a humid subtropical climate, sochi is the warmest city to host a winter olympic games.[15] sochi 2014 is the 12th straight olympics to outlaw smoking; all sochi venues, olympic park bars and restaurants and public areas were smoke-free during the games.[16] it is also the first time that an olympic park has been built for hosting winter games.[citation needed]
the sochi olympic park was built by the black sea coast in the imeretinsky valley, about 4 km (2.5 miles) from russia's border with abkhazia/georgia.[17][18] the venues were clustered around a central water basin on which the medals plaza is built, allowing all indoor venues to be within walking distance. it also features "the waters of the olympic park" (designed by california-based company wet), a choreographed fountain which served as the backdrop in the medals awards and the opening and closing ceremonies of the event.[19][20] the new venues include:[21]
a street circuit known as the sochi autodrom was constructed in and around olympic park. its primary use is to host the formula one russian grand prix, which held its inaugural edition in october 2014.[22][23][24]
in january 2015, work began on adapting fisht olympic stadium into an open-air football stadium to host matches during the 2018 fifa world cup.[25][26]
a new ice hockey team in the kontinental hockey league, hc sochi leopards, now plays in bolshoy arena.
the olympic infrastructure was constructed according to a federal target program (ftp). in june 2009, the games' organizers reported they were one year ahead in building the main olympic facilities as compared to recent olympic games.[27] in november 2011, ioc president jacques rogge was in sochi and concluded that the city had made significant progress since he last visited eighteen months earlier.[28]
according to the ftp, us$580 million would be spent on construction and modernization of telecommunications in the region. avaya was named by the sochi organizing committee as the official supplier of telecommunications equipment. avaya provided the data network equipment, including switches, routers, security, telephones and contact-center systems. it provided engineers and technicians to design and test the systems, and worked with other technology partners to provide athletes, dignitaries and fans information about the games.[29][30]
the 2014 olympics is the first "fabric-enabled" games using shortest path bridging (spb) technology.[31] the network is capable of handling up to 54,000 gbit/s (54 tbit/s) of traffic.[32]
infrastructure built for the games included:
during the games, the core networks of rostelecom and transtelekom were used.[33]
in january 2012, the newest equipment for the television coverage of the games arrived in the port of adler. prepared specifically for the games, a team of regional specialists and the latest technology provide a qualitatively new level of television production in the region.[34]
the fiber-optic channel links sochi between adler and krasnaya polyana. the 46-kilometre-long (29 mi) channel enables videoconferencing and news reporting from the olympics.[35]
in november 2013, it was reported that the fiber-optic cable that was built by the federal communications agency, rossvyaz, had no operator. with rostelecom and megafon both refusing to operate it, the line was transferred to the ownership of the state enterprise center for monitoring & development of infocommunication technologies (russian: центр мир ит).[36]
russian mobile phone operator megafon expanded and improved sochi's telecom infrastructure with over 700 new 2g/3g/4g cell towers. sochi was the first games to offer 4g connectivity at a speed of 10 mb/sec.
in january 2014, rostelecom reported that it had connected the olympic media center in sochi to the internet and organized channels of communication with the main media center of the olympic games in the coastal cluster and press center in moscow. the media center was built at total cost of 17 million rubles.[37][38]
a five-year strategy for increasing the power supply of the sochi region was presented by russian energy experts during a seminar on 29 may 2009, held by the sochi 2014 organizing committee, and attended by international olympic committee (ioc) experts and officials from the russian ministry of regional development, the russian ministry of energy, the state corporation olimpstroy and the krasnodar krai administration.[39]
according to the strategy, the capacity of the regional energy network would increase by two and a half times by 2014, guaranteeing a stable power supply during and after the games.
the power demand of sochi at the end of may 2009 was 424 mw. the power demand of the olympic infrastructure was expected to be about 340 mw.
earlier plans also include building combined cycle (steam and gas) power stations near the cities of tuapse and novorossiysk and construction of a cable-wire powerline, partially on the floor of the black sea.[41]
the transport infrastructure prepared to support the olympics includes many roads, tunnels, bridges, interchanges, railroads and stations in and around sochi. among others, 8 flyovers, 102 bridges, tens of tunnels and a bypass route for heavy trucks — 367 km (228 miles) of roads were paved.[42]
the sochi light metro is located between adler and krasnaya polyana connecting the olympic park, sochi international airport, and the venues in krasnaya polyana.[43]
the existing 102 km (63-mile), tuapse-to-adler railroad was renovated to provide double track throughout, increasing capacity and enabling a reliable regional service to be provided and extending to the airport. in december 2009, russian railways ordered 38 siemens mobility desiro trains for delivery in 2013 for use during the olympics, with an option for a further 16 partly built in russia.[44] russian railways established a high-speed moscow-adler link and a new railroad (more than 60 kilometres or 37 miles long) passing by the territory of ukraine.[45]
at sochi international airport, a new terminal was built along a 3.5 km (2.2-mile) runway extension, overlapping the mzymta river.[46] backup airports were built in gelendzhik, mineralnye vody and krasnodar by 2009.[47]
at the port of sochi, a new offshore terminal 1.5 km (0.93 mi) from the shore allows docking for cruise ships with capacities of 3,000 passengers.[48] the cargo terminal of the seaport would be moved from the centre of sochi.
roadways were detoured, some going around the construction site and others being cut off.[49]
in may 2009, russian railways started the construction of tunnel complex no. 1 (the final total is six) on the combined road (automobile and railway) from adler to alpica service mountain resort in the krasnaya polyana region. the tunnel complex no. 1 is located near akhshtyr in adlersky city district, and includes:[50]
russian railways president vladimir yakunin stated the road construction costed more than 200 billion rubles.[51]
in addition, sochi's railway stations were renovated. these are dagomys, sochi, matsesta, khosta, lazarevskaya, and loo railway stations. in adler, a new railway station was built while the original building was preserved, and in the olympic park cluster, a new station was built from scratch, the olympic park railway station. another new railway station was built in estosadok, close to krasnaya polyana.
funds were spent on the construction of hotels for 10,300 guests.[53] the first of the olympic hotels, zvezdny (stellar), was rebuilt anew.[54] significant funds were spent on the construction of an advanced sewage treatment system in sochi, designed by olimpstroy. the system meets bref standards and employs top available technologies for environment protection, including tertiary treatment with microfiltration.[55]
six post offices were opened at competition venues, two of them in the main media centre in olympic park and in the mountain village of estosadok. in addition to standard services, customers had access to unique services including two new products, fotomarka and retropismo. fotomarka presents an opportunity to get a stylized sheet of eight souvenir stamps with one's own photos, using the services of a photographer in the office. retropismo service allows a customer to write with their own stylus or pen on antique paper with further letters, winding string and wax seal affixing. all the new sites and post offices in sochi were opened during the olympics until late night 7 days a week, and employees were trained to speak english.[56]
on 29 september 2013, the olympic torch was lit in ancient olympia, beginning a seven-day journey across greece and on to russia, then the torch relay started at moscow on 7 october 2013 before passing 83 russian cities and arriving at sochi on the day of the opening ceremony, 7 february 2014.[57] it is the longest torch relay in olympic history, a 60,000-kilometre (40,000 miles) route that passes through all regions of the country, from kaliningrad in the west to chukotka in the east.
the olympic torch reached the north pole for first time via a nuclear-powered icebreaker (50 let pobedy). the torch was also passed for the first time in space, though not lit for the duration of the flight for safety reasons, on flight soyuz tma-11m to the international space station (iss). the spacecraft itself was adorned with olympic-themed livery including the games' emblem. russian cosmonauts oleg kotov and sergey ryazansky waved the torch on a spacewalk outside iss. the torch returned to earth five days later on board soyuz tma-09m.[58][59] the torch also reached europe's highest mountain, mount elbrus, and siberia's lake baikal.[60]
the opening ceremony of the 2014 winter olympics was held on 7 february 2014 at fisht olympic stadium, an indoor arena built specifically for the ceremonies. the ceremony featured scenes based around aspects of russian history and arts, including ballet, classical music, the russian revolution, and the age of the soviet union. the opening scene of the ceremony featured a notable technical error, where one of five snowflakes, which were to expand to form the olympic rings, malfunctioned and did not expand (a mishap mocked by the organizers at the closing ceremony where one of the roundrelay dance groups symbolizing the olympic rings "failed" to expand). the torch was taken into the stadium by maria sharapova, who then passed it to yelena isinbayeva who, in turn, passed it to wrestler aleksandr karelin. karelin then passed the torch to gymnast alina kabaeva. figure skater irina rodnina took the torch and was met by former ice hockey goalkeeper vladislav tretiak, who exited the stadium to jointly light the olympic cauldron located near the center of olympic park.[61][62][63][64]
a record 88 nations qualified to compete,[65] which beat the previous record of 82 set at the previous winter olympics in vancouver. the number of athletes who qualified per country is listed in the table below (number of athletes shown in parentheses). seven nations made their winter olympics debut: dominica, malta, paraguay, timor-leste, togo, tonga, and zimbabwe.[66]
kristina krone qualified to compete in her second consecutive games for puerto rico, but the island's olympic committee once again chose not to send her to compete.[67] similarly, south africa decided not to send alpine skier sive speelman to sochi.[68] algeria also did not enter its only qualified athlete, mehdi-selim khelifi.[69]
india's athletes originally competed as independent olympic participants and marched under the olympic flag during the opening ceremony, as india was originally suspended in december 2012 over the election process of the indian olympic association.[70] on 11 february, the indian olympic association was reinstated and india's athletes were allowed the option to compete under their own flag from that time onward.[71] although shiva keshavan competed as an independent athlete and is recorded as such, he was permitted to walk under the flag of india at the closing ceremony.
during the games some countries had a national house, a meeting place for supporters, athletes and other followers.[72] houses can be either free for visitors to access or they can have limited access by invitation only.[73]
the 2014 winter olympics featured 98 events over 15 disciplines in 7 sports. a total of twelve new events were contested, making it the largest winter olympics to date.[85][86]
numbers in parentheses indicate the number of medal events contested in each separate discipline.
on 6 april 2011, the ioc accepted a number of events that were submitted by their respective sports federations to be considered for inclusion into the official program of these olympic games.[87]
the events included a figure skating team event, women's ski jumping, mixed relay biathlon, ski half-pipe, and team relay luge.
on 4 july 2011, the ioc announced that three events would be added to the program.[88] these events, which were officially declared by olympic committee president jacques rogge on 5 july 2011,[86] were:
team alpine skiing was also presented as a candidate for inclusion in the olympic program but the executive board of the ioc rejected this proposal. the international ski federation persisted with the nomination and this was considered.[89] there were reports of bandy possibly being added to the sports program,[90][91][92] but the ioc rejected this request. subsequently, the international governing body, federation of international bandy, decided that irkutsk and shelekhov in russia would host the 2014 bandy world championship just before the olympics.
on 28 november 2006, the executive board of the ioc decided not to include ski mountaineering,[93] ski-orienteering,[94] or winter triathlon[95] in the review process of the program.[95]
the closing ceremony was held on 23 february 2014 between 20:14 msk (utc+4) and 22:25 msk (utc+4) at the fisht olympic stadium in sochi.[96]
the ceremony was dedicated to russian culture featuring world-renowned russian stars like conductor and violinist yuri bashmet, conductor valery gergiev, pianist denis matsuev, singer hibla gerzmava and violinist tatiana samouil. these artists were joined by performers from the bolshoi and mariinsky theaters.
sochi's medal design was unveiled in may 2013. the design is intended to resemble sochi's landscape, with a semi-translucent section containing a "patchwork quilt" of diamonds representing mountains; the diamonds themselves contain designs that reflect russia's regions.[97] those who won gold medals on 15 february received special medals with fragments of the chelyabinsk meteor, marking the one-year anniversary of the event where pieces of the cosmic body fell into the chebarkul lake in the ural mountains in central russia.[98]
the top ten listed nocs by number of gold medals are listed below. the host nation, russia, is highlighted.
to sort this table by nation, total medal count, or any other column, click on the  icon next to the column title.
  *   host nation (russia)a  legkov and vylegzhanin were initially disqualified by the ioc for doping offenses in november 2017, and their 2014 olympic medals were stripped (gold and silver respectively). however, their results were restored on 1 february 2018 following a successful appeal.
in the following calendar each blue box represents one or more event competition(s), such as a qualification round, on that day. the yellow boxes represent medal-awarding finals for a sport with in each box the number of finals that were contested on that day.[99]
security during both the olympics and paralympics were handled by over 40,000 law enforcement officials, including police and the russian armed forces.[100][101] a presidential decree signed by president vladimir putin took effect on 7 january, requiring that any protests and demonstrations in sochi and the surrounding area through 21 march (the end of the paralympics) be approved by the federal security service.[102] for the duration of the decree, travel restrictions were also in effect in and around sochi: "controlled" zones, dubbed the "ring of steel" by the media, covered the coastal and mountain clusters which encompass all of the games' venues and infrastructure, including transport hubs such as railway stations. to enter controlled areas, visitors were required to pass through security checkpoints with x-ray machines, metal detectors and explosive material scanners.[103] several areas were designated as "forbidden", including sochi national park and the border with abkhazia.[102][104] an unmanned aerial vehicle squadron, along with s-400 and pantsir-s1 air defense rockets were used to protect olympic airspace. four gunboats were also deployed on the black sea to protect the coastline.[105]
a number of security organizations and forces began stationing in and around sochi in january 2014; russia's ministry of emergency situations (emercom) was stationed in sochi for the games beginning on 7 january 2014.[106][107] a group of 10,000 internal troops of the ministry of interior also provided security services during the games.[108] in mid-january, 1,500 siberian regional command troops were stationed in a military town near krasnaya polyana.[109] a group of 400 cossacks in traditional uniforms were also present to accompany police patrols.[110][111] the 58th army unit of the russian armed forces, were defending the georgia-russia border.[112] the united states also supplied navy ships and other assets for security purposes.[113]
all communication and internet traffic by sochi residents was captured and filtered through deep packet inspection systems at all mobile networks using the sorm system.[114][115]
former professional speed skater and current deputy of the russian state duma svetlana zhurova has stated that the 2014 sochi olympics were vladimir putin's personal project to showcase russia to the world.[116]
organizers received several threats prior to the games. in a july 2013 video release, chechen islamist commander dokka umarov called for attacks on the games, stating that the games were being staged "on the bones of many, many muslims killed ...and buried on our lands extending to the red sea."[117]
threats were received from the group vilayat dagestan, which had claimed responsibility for the volgograd bombings under the demands of umarov, and a number of national olympic committees had also received threats via e-mail, threatening that terrorists would kidnap or "blow up" athletes during the games. however, while the ioc did state that the letters "[contained] no threat and appears to be a random message from a member of the public", the u.s. ski and snowboarding teams hired a private security agency to provide additional protection during the games.[112][118][119]
in most regions, broadcast rights to the 2014 winter olympics were packaged together with broadcast rights for the 2016 summer olympics, but some broadcasters obtained rights to further games as well. domestic broadcast rights were sold by sportfive to a consortium of three russian broadcasters; channel one, vgtrk, and ntv plus.[120]
in the united states, the 2014 winter olympics were the first in a new, us$4.38 billion contract with nbcuniversal, extending its broadcast rights to the olympic games through 2020.[121]
in canada, after losing the 2010 and 2012 games to bell media and rogers media, the canadian broadcasting corporation re-gained broadcast rights to the olympics for the first time since 2008, gaining rights to the 2014 and 2016 games. bell and rogers sub-licensed pay-tv rights for their tsn, sportsnet and réseau des sports networks, as well as tva group's tva sports.[122][123][124][125]
in australia, after all three major commercial networks pulled out of bidding on rights to both the 2014 and 2016 games due to cost concerns, the ioc awarded broadcast rights to just the 2014 winter olympics to network ten for a$20 million.[126][127][128]
several broadcasters used the games to trial the emerging ultra high definition television (uhdtv) standard. both ntv plus and comcast filmed portions of the games in 4k resolution; comcast offered its content through smart tv apps, while ntv+ held public and cinema viewings of the content. nhk filmed portions of the games in 8k resolution for public viewing. olympic sponsor panasonic filmed the opening ceremony in 4k.[129][130][131][132]
a variety of concerns over the games, or russia's hosting of the games, had been expressed by various entities. concerns were shown over russia's policies surrounding the lgbt community, including the government's denial of a proposed pride house for the games on moral grounds, and a federal law passed in june 2013 which criminalized the distribution of "propaganda of non-traditional sexual relationships" among minors.[133][134][135][136][137] severe cost overruns made the 2014 winter olympics the most expensive olympics in history; with russian politician boris nemtsov citing allegations of corruption among government officials,[138] and allison stewart of the saïd business school at oxford citing tight relationships between the government and construction firms.[139]

some circassian organizations objected to the games being held on land their ancestors held until 1864,[140][141] when most of them were vanquished at the end of the russian-circassian war (1763–1864), in what they consider to be ethnic cleansing or genocide.[142][143] the use of krasnaya polyana ("red hill" or "red glade") as an event site was considered sensitive, as it was named for a group of circassians who were defeated in a bloody battle with russians while attempting to return home over it in 1864.[144][145] some circassian groups demanded that the games be cancelled or moved unless russia apologized for their actions.[146] other groups did not outright object to the games, but suggested that symbols of circassian history and culture be incorporated into the games, as australia, the united states and canada did for their indigenous cultures in 2000, 2002, and 2010 respectively.[147]

u.s. broadcaster nbc largely avoided broadcasting material critical of russia, although several segments deemed "overly friendly to russia" were criticized by some commentators.[148] however, following the closing ceremony, commentators evaluated the games to have been successful overall.[149][150]
following the games, reports began to emerge that the russian olympic team had participated in a state-run doping program, which supplied their athletes with performance-enhancing drugs. these allegations first emerged in a december 2014 documentary by german public broadcaster ard,[151] and were detailed further in a may 2016 report by the new york times—which published allegations by dr. grigory rodchenkov, the former director of russia's anti-doping laboratory. rodchenkov alleged that a conspiracy of corrupt anti-doping officials, fsb intelligence agents, and compliant russian athletes used banned substances to gain an unfair advantage during the games.[152][153] rodchenkov stated that the fsb tampered with over 100 urine samples as part of a cover-up, and that at least fifteen of the russian medals won in sochi were the result of doping.[152][153][154][155]
the world anti-doping agency (wada) commissioned an independent report by richard mclaren, which corroborated claims that russian authorities had been discreetly swapping out urine samples that tested positive for performance-enhancing substances. the report concluded that the program had been operating from "at least late 2011 to august 2015", and had covered up 643 positive samples across olympic and non-olympic sports.[156][157][158] as a result, wada considered the russian anti-doping agency to be non-compliant with the world anti-doping code, and recommended that russia be banned from competing in the 2016 summer olympics.[159]
russia was not banned from the 2016 olympics by the ioc, the decision that was widely criticized by both athletes[160][161][162] and writers;[163][164][165] the ioc only required russia's athletes to be cleared by an internal panel and their respective sports federations.[166] the iaaf had suspended russia from international track and field events due to the scandal, but did allow darya klishina to participate in the olympics because she was confirmed not to be a part of a doping program.[167][168] the international paralympic committee suspended the russian paralympic committee and banned the team from the 2016 summer paralympics.[169]
on 5 december 2017, the ioc voted to suspend the russian olympic committee, thus banning it from sending athletes under the russian flag to the 2018 winter olympics. cleared russian athletes were allowed to participate as "olympic athletes from russia" (oar).[5][6] two of them, curler alexander krushelnitskiy, who won a bronze medal, and bobsledder nadezhda sergeeva, failed drug tests during the games.
the ioc's oswald commission disqualified and banned 43 russian athletes, and stripped thirteen medals they earned in sochi.[170] on 1 february 2018, the court of arbitration for sport (cas) found that the ioc provided insufficient evidence for 28 athletes, and overturned their ioc sanctions. for 11 other athletes, the cas decided that there was sufficient evidence to uphold their sochi sanctions, but reduced their lifetime bans to only the 2018 winter olympics.[171] the ioc said in a statement that "the result of the cas decision does not mean that athletes from the group of 28 will be invited to the [2018 winter olympic] games. not being sanctioned does not automatically confer the privilege of an invitation” and that “this [case] may have a serious impact on the future fight against doping”. the ioc found it important to note that the cas secretary general "insisted that the cas decision does not mean that these 28 athletes are innocent” and that they would consider an appeal against the court's decision.[172][173] later that month, the russian olympic committee was reinstated by the ioc, despite failed doping tests during the 2018 olympics,[174] and the russian anti-doping agency was re-certified in september, despite the russian officials not accepting the mclaren report.[175]

the 2018 winter olympics, officially known as the xxiii olympic winter games (french: les xxiiies jeux olympiques d'hiver;[1] korean: 제23회 동계 올림픽, romanized: jeisipsamhoe donggye ollimpik) and commonly known as pyeongchang 2018, was an international winter multi-sport event that was held between 9 and 25 february 2018 in pyeongchang county, gangwon province, south korea, with the opening rounds for certain events held on 8 february 2018, the day before the opening ceremony. 
pyeongchang was elected as the host city in july 2011, at the 123rd ioc session in durban, south africa. this was the second time that south korea had hosted the olympic games, having previously hosted the 1988 summer olympics in seoul, but it was only the first winter olympics to be held in the country. it was the first of three consecutive olympics to be held in east asia, the following two being tokyo 2020 (summer) and beijing 2022 (winter). it was the third time that an east asian country had hosted the winter games, after sapporo (1972) and nagano (1998), both of these cities in japan. it was also the first winter olympics to be held in mainland asia.
the games featured 102 events over 15 disciplines, a record number of events for the winter games. four events made their olympic debut in 2018: "big air" snowboarding, mass start speed skating, mixed doubles curling, and mixed team alpine skiing. a total of 2,914 athletes from 92 nocs competed, including the national debuts of ecuador, eritrea, kosovo, malaysia, nigeria and singapore.
after a state-sponsored doping program was exposed following the 2014 winter olympics, the russian olympic committee was suspended, but selected athletes were allowed to compete neutrally under the special ioc designation of "olympic athletes from russia" (oar). north korea agreed to participate in the games despite tense relations with south korea; the two nations paraded together at the opening ceremony as a unified korea, and fielded a unified team (cor) in the women's ice hockey.
norway led the total medal tally with 39, followed by germany's 31 and canada's 29.[2] germany and norway were tied for the highest number of gold medals, both winning 14. host nation south korea won 17 medals, their highest medal haul at a winter olympics, five of which were gold.
pyeongchang bid to host both the 2010 and 2014 winter olympics, but lost in the final rounds of voting to vancouver and sochi respectively.[3]
munich also launched a bid to host these games. prior to beijing's successful 2022 winter olympics bid, munich would have become the first city to host both the winter and the summer games, having previously hosted the 1972 summer olympics, but received only 25 votes. annecy (in southeastern france) launched their own bid, which failed to secure public support from the local citizens. their bid ended up receiving seven votes.[4]
pyeongchang was elected as the host city at the 123rd ioc session in durban in 2011, earning the necessary majority of at least 48 votes in just one round of voting, more votes than its competitors combined. with this, pyeongchang became the third asian city to host the winter games; the first two were in japan, at sapporo (1972) and nagano (1998).[5][6]
on 5 august 2011, the international olympic committee (ioc) announced the formation of the pyeongchang 2018 coordination commission.[7][8] on 4 october 2011, it was announced that the organizing committee for the 2018 winter olympics would be headed by kim jin-sun. the pyeongchang organizing committee for the 2018 olympic & paralympic winter games (pocog) was launched at its inaugural assembly on 19 october 2011. the first tasks of the organizing committee were putting together a master plan for the games as well as forming a design for the venues.[9] the ioc coordination commission for the 2018 winter olympics made their first visit to pyeongchang in march 2012. by then, construction was already underway on the olympic village.[10][11] in june 2012, construction began on a high-speed rail line that would connect pyeongchang to seoul.[12]
the international paralympic committee met for an orientation with the pyeongchang 2018 organizing committee in july 2012.[13] then-ioc president jacques rogge visited pyeongchang for the first time in february 2013.[14]
the pyeongchang organizing committee for the 2018 olympic & paralympic winter games created pyeongchang winners in 2014 by recruiting university students living in south korea to spread awareness of the olympic games through social networking services and news articles.[15]
the design for the games' medals was unveiled on 21 september 2017. created by lee suk-woo, the design features a pattern of diagonal ridges on both sides, with the olympic rings on the front, and the obverse showing the 2018 olympics' emblem, the event name and the discipline. the edge of each medal is marked with extrusions of hangul alphabets, while the ribbons are made from a traditional south korean textile.[16]
the torch relay started on 24 october 2017 in greece and lasted for 101 days, ending at the start of the olympics on 9 february 2018. the olympic torch entered south korea on 1 november 2017. there were 7,500 torch bearers to represent the combined korean population of approximately 75 million people. there were also 2,018 support runners to guard the torch and act as messengers.
the torch and its bearers traveled by a diverse means of transportation, including by turtle ship in hansando island, sailboat on the baengmagang river in buyeo, marine cable car in yeosu, zip-wire over bamseom island, steam train in the gokseong train village, marine rail bike along the east coast in samcheok, and by yacht in busan metropolitan city.
there were also robot torch relays in jeju and daejeon.[17]
most of the outdoor snow events were held in the county of pyeongchang, while some of the alpine skiing events took place in the neighboring county of jeongseon. the indoor ice events were held in the nearby city of gangneung.
the alpensia sports park in daegwallyeong-myeon, pyeongchang, was the focus of the 2018 winter olympics.[18][19] it was home to the olympic stadium,[20] the olympic village and most of the outdoor sports venues.
additionally, a stand-alone outdoor sports venue was located in bongpyeong-myeon, pyeongchang:
another stand-alone outdoor sports venue was located in neighboring jeongseon county:
the gangneung olympic park, in the neighborhood of gyo-dong in gangneung city, includes four indoor sports venues, all in close proximity to one another.
in addition, a stand-alone indoor sports venue was located in the grounds of catholic kwandong university.
ticket prices for the 2018 winter olympics were announced in april 2016 and tickets went on sale in october 2016. event tickets ranged in price from ₩20,000 south korean won (approx. us$18) to ₩900,000 (~us$818) while tickets for the opening and closing ceremonies ranged from ₩220,000 (~us$200) to ₩1.5 million (~us$1363). the exact prices were determined through market research; around 50% of the tickets were expected to cost about ₩80,000 (~us$73) or less, and tickets in sports that are relatively unknown in the region, such as biathlon and luge, were made cheaper in order to encourage attendance. by contrast, figure skating and the men's ice hockey gold-medal game carried the most expensive tickets of the games.[21]
as of 11 october 2017, domestic ticket sales for the games were reported to be slow. of the 750,000 seats allocated to south koreans, only 20.7% had been sold. international sales were more favorable, with 59.7% of the 320,000 allocated tickets sold.[22][23] however, as of 31 january 2018, 77% of all tickets had been sold.[24]
the opening ceremony of the 2018 winter olympics was held at the pyeongchang olympic stadium on 9 february 2018; the us$100 million facility was only intended to be used for the opening and closing ceremonies of these olympics and the subsequent paralympics, and was demolished following their conclusion.[25][26][27]
the 2018 winter olympics featured 102 events over 15 disciplines in 7 sports,[28] making it the first winter olympics to surpass 100 medal events. six new events in existing sports were introduced to the winter olympic program in pyeongchang: men's and ladies' big air snowboarding, mixed doubles curling, men's and ladies' mass start speed skating, and mixed team alpine skiing.[28][29]



numbers in parentheses indicate the number of medal events contested in each separate discipline.
a total of 92 teams qualified at least one athlete to compete in the games. the number of athletes who qualified per country is listed in the table below (number of athletes shown in parentheses). six nations made their winter olympics debut: ecuador, eritrea, kosovo, malaysia, nigeria and singapore.[30][31] athletes from three further countries – the cayman islands, dominica and peru – qualified to compete, but all three national olympic committees returned the quota spots back to the international ski federation (fis).[32]
under an historic agreement facilitated by the ioc, qualified athletes from north korea were allowed to cross the korean demilitarized zone into south korea to compete in the games.[33][34][35] the two nations marched together under the korean unification flag during the opening ceremony.[36][37] a unified korean team, consisting of 12 players from north korea and 23 from south korea, competed in the women's ice hockey tournament under a special ioc country code designation (cor) following talks in panmunjom on 17 january 2018.[38] the two nations also participated separately: the south korea team competed in every sport and the north korea team competed in alpine skiing, cross-country skiing, figure skating and short track speed skating.[39]
on 5 december 2017, the ioc announced that the russian olympic committee had been suspended due to the russian doping controversy and the investigation into the 2014 winter olympics in sochi. individual russian athletes, who qualified and could demonstrate they had complied with the ioc's doping regulations, were given the option to compete at the 2018 games as "olympic athletes from russia" (oar) under the olympic flag and with the olympic anthem played at any ceremony.[40]
a  apart from the respective delegations, north korea and south korea formed a unified korean women's ice hockey team.
b  russian athletes were entitled to participate as olympic athletes from russia (oar) if individually cleared by the ioc.
the ioc has allowed nbc to influence the olympic event scheduling to maximize u.s. television ratings when possible, due to the substantial fees paid by nbc for rights to the olympics (which have been extended through 2032 with a nearly $8 billion agreement).[47][48] as figure skating is one of the most popular winter olympic sports among u.s. viewers, the figure skating events were scheduled with morning start times to accommodate primetime broadcasts in the americas. this scheduling practice affected the events themselves, including skaters having to adjust to the modified schedule, as well as lower attendance levels at the sessions.[49]
conversely, and somewhat controversially, eight of the eleven biathlon events were scheduled at night, making it necessary for competitors to ski and shoot under floodlights, with colder temperatures and blustery winds.[50]


  *   host nation (south korea)[51]three podium sweeps were recorded during the games.
the closing ceremony of the 2018 winter olympics was held at the pyeongchang olympic stadium on 25 february 2018. ioc president thomas bach declared the games closed, and the cauldron was extinguished.
broadcast rights to the 2018 winter olympics were already sold in some countries as part of long-term broadcast rights deals, including the games' local rightsholder sbs, which in july 2011 had extended its rights to the olympics through 2024.[70] sbs sub-licensed its rights to mbc and kbs.[71]
on 29 june 2015, the ioc announced that discovery communications (now discovery inc.) had acquired exclusive rights to the olympics across all of europe (excluding russia) from 2018 through 2024. discovery's pan-european eurosport channels were promoted as the main broadcaster of the games, but discovery's free-to-air channels such as dmax in spain,[72] kanal 5 in sweden, and tvnorge in norway, were also involved in the overall broadcasting arrangements.[73] discovery was required to sub-license at least 100 hours of coverage to free-to-air broadcasters in each market;[74][75] some of these agreements required certain sports to be exclusive to eurosport and its affiliated networks.[76] the deal did not initially cover france due to the broadcast rights of  france télévisions, which run through to the 2020 games.[77] in the united kingdom, discovery held exclusive pay television rights under licence from the bbc, in return for the bbc sub-licensing the free-to-air rights to the 2022 and 2024 olympics from discovery.[78]
russian state broadcaster channel one, and sports channel match tv, committed to covering the games with a focus on russian athletes.[77] russia was not affected by the eurosport deal, due to a pre-existing contract held by a marketing agency which extends to 2024.[77]
in the united states, the games were once again broadcast by nbcuniversal properties under a long-term contract.[79][80] on 28 march 2017, nbc announced that it would adopt a new format for its primetime coverage of the 2018 winter olympics, with a focus on live coverage in all time zones to take advantage of pyeongchang's 14-hour difference with u.s. eastern time (and 17-hour difference with u.s. pacific time), and to address criticism of its previous tape delay practices. as before, the primetime block began at 8:00 p.m. et (5:00 p.m. pt), and unlike previous olympics, was available for streaming. figure skating events were deliberately scheduled with morning sessions so they could be aired during primetime in the americas (and in turn, nbc's coverage; due to the substantial fees nbc has paid for rights to the olympics, the ioc has allowed nbc to have influence on event scheduling to maximize u.s. television ratings when possible; nbc agreed to a $7.75 billion contract extension on 7 may 2014, to air the olympics through the 2032 games,[47] is also one of the major sources of revenue for the ioc).[48][49] coverage took a break in the east for late local news, after which coverage continued into "primetime plus", featuring additional live coverage into the eastern late night and western primetime hours.
nhk and olympic broadcasting services (obs) once again filmed portions of the games in high-dynamic-range 8k resolution video, including 90 hours of footage of selected events and the opening ceremonies.[81][82] atsc 3.0 digital terrestrial television, using 4k resolution, was introduced in south korea in 2017 in time for the olympics.[83][84] this footage was delivered in 4k in the u.s. by nbcuniversal parent comcast to participating television providers, including its own xfinity, as well as directv and dish network. nbc's raleigh-based affiliate wral-tv also held demonstration viewings as part of its atsc 3.0 test broadcasts.[85][86][87]
the 2018 winter olympics were used to showcase 5g wireless technologies, as part of a collaboration between domestic wireless sponsor kt, and worldwide sponsor intel. several venues were outfitted with 5g networks to facilitate features such as live camera feeds from bobsleds, and multi-camera views from cross-country and figure skating events. these were offered as part of public demonstrations coordinated by the two sponsors.[88][89]
the winners of the olympic golden rings awards were announced in june 2019. there were 75 pieces of broadcast content from the 2018 olympics submitted over ten categories (plus one category for the 2018 youth olympics). nbc won a total of eight awards, winning four of the main categories: best olympic feature, best olympic digital service, best olympic programme and best documentary film; they came second in the best on-air promotion and best social media content/production categories. discovery/eurosport won four categories: best on-air promotion, best production design, best innovation and best social media content/production; they also came second in the best olympic digital service category. the bbc and nhk took the other two main awards: most sustainable operation and best athlete profile respectively. the title of best feature at the youth olympic games buenos aires 2018 was also awarded to the bbc.[90]
the official emblem, reflecting ice crystals and derived from the hangul letters ㅍ and ㅊ (the initial sounds of the "pyeong" and "chang"), was unveiled on 3 may 2013.[91] in all official materials, the name of the host city was stylized in camelcase as "pyeongchang", in order to alleviate potential confusion with pyongyang, the similarly-named capital of neighboring north korea.[92]
new international sponsorship deals also debuted in pyeongchang: toyota was introduced as the new "mobility" sponsor of the olympics, although the company waived its domestic sponsorship to the local competitors hyundai and kia [93][94][95][96][97] alibaba group and intel also debuted as e-commerce/cloud services and technology sponsors respectively.[98][99]
due to the state of relations between north and south korea, concerns were raised over the security of the 2018 winter olympics, especially in the wake of tensions over north korean missile and nuclear tests. on 20 september 2017, south korean president moon jae-in stated that the country would ensure the security of the games.[100] the next day, laura flessel-colovic, the french minister of youth affairs and sports, stated that france would pull out of the games if the safety of its delegation could not be guaranteed.[101]
the next day, austria and germany raised similar concerns and also threatened to skip the games. france later reaffirmed its participation.[102] in early december 2017, the united states ambassador to the united nations, nikki haley, told fox news that it was an "open question" whether the united states was going to participate in the games, citing security concerns in the region.[103] however, days later the white house press secretary, sarah huckabee sanders, stated that the united states would participate.[104]
in his new year's address on 1 january 2018, north korean leader kim jong-un proposed talks in seoul over the country's participation in the games, which would be the first high-level talks between the north and south in over two years. because of the talks, held on 9 january, north korea agreed to field athletes in pyeongchang.[105][106] on 17 january 2018, it was announced that north and south korea had agreed to field a unified korean women's ice hockey team at the games, and to enter together under a korean unification flag during the opening ceremony.[107][108]
these moves were met with opposition in south korea, including protests and online petitions; critics argued that the government was attempting to use the olympics to spread pro-north korean sentiment, and that the unified hockey team would fail.[109] a rap video entitled "the regret for pyeongchang" (평창유감), which echoed this criticism and called the event the "pyongyang olympics", went viral in the country.[110] japan's foreign affairs minister tarō kōno warned south korea to be wary of north korea's "charm offensive", and not to ease its pressure on the country.[107][111]
the south korean president, moon jae-in, at the start of the olympics shook hands with kim yo-jong, the sister of north korean leader kim jong-un and a prominent figure of the regime. this marked the first time since the korean war that a member of the ruling kim dynasty had visited south korea.[112][113] in contrast, u.s. vice president mike pence met with fred warmbier (father of otto warmbier, who had died after being released from captivity in north korea) and a group of north korean defectors in pyeongchang.[114] american officials said that north korea cancelled a meeting with pence at the last minute.[115]
at the closing ceremony, north korea sent general kim yong-chol as its delegate. his presence was met with hostility from south korean conservatives, as there were allegations that he had a role in the roks cheonan sinking and other past attacks. the ministry of unification stated that "there is a limitation in pinpointing who was responsible for the incident." although he is subject to sanctions, they did not affect his ability to visit the country for the games.[116][117]
russia's participation in the 2018 winter olympics was affected by the aftermath of its state-sponsored doping program. as a result, the ioc suspended the russian olympic committee in december 2017, although russian athletes whitelisted by the ioc were allowed to compete neutrally under the oar (olympic athletes from russia) designation.[118] the official sanctions imposed by the ioc included: the exclusion of russian government officials from the games; the use of the olympic flag and olympic anthem in place of the russian flag and anthem; and the submission of a replacement logo for the oar uniforms.[119]
by early january 2018, the ioc had banned 43 russian athletes from competing in the 2018 winter olympics and all future olympic games (as part of the oswald commission). of those athletes, 42 appealed against their bans to the court of arbitration for sport (cas) and 28 of the appeals were successful, but eleven of the athletes had their sanctions upheld due to the weight of evidence against them. the ioc found it important to note that cas secretary general "insisted that the cas decision does not mean that these 28 athletes are innocent" and that they would consider an appeal against the court's decision. hearings for the remaining three athletes were postponed.[120]
the eventual number of neutral russian athletes that participated at the 2018 games was 168. these were selected from an original pool of 500 athletes that was put forward for consideration and, in order to receive an invitation to the games, they were obliged to meet a number of pre-games conditions. two athletes, who met the conditions and were cleared by the ioc, subsequently failed drug tests during the games.
russian president vladimir putin and other officials had signalled in the past that it would be a humiliation if russian athletes were not allowed to compete under the russian flag.[121] however, there were never actually any official plans to boycott the 2018 games[118] and in late 2017 the russian government agreed to allow their athletes to compete at the games as individuals under a neutral designation.[122][123] despite this public show of co-operation, there were numerous misgivings voiced by leading russian politicians, including a statement from putin himself saying that he believed the united states had used its influence within the ioc to "orchestrate the doping scandal".[124] 86% of the russian population opposed participation at the olympics under a neutral flag,[125] and many russian fans attended the games wearing the russian colors and chanting "russia!" in unison, in an act of defiance against the ban.[126]
the ioc's decision was heavily criticized by jack robertson, primary investigator of the russian doping program on behalf of the world anti-doping agency (wada), in whose opinion the judgement was commercially and politically motivated. he argued that not only was doping rife amongst russian athletes but that there was no sign of it being eradicated.[127] the cas decision to overturn the life bans of 28 russian athletes and restore their medals was also fiercely criticized, by olympic officials, ioc president thomas bach and whistleblower grigory rodchenkov's lawyer.[128]

the 2022 winter olympics, officially known as the xxiv olympic winter games (french: les xxives jeux olympiques d'hiver;[1] chinese: 第二十四届冬季奥林匹克运动会; pinyin: dì èrshísì jiè dōngjì àolínpǐkè yùndònghuì), and commonly known as beijing 2022, is an international winter multi-sport event that is scheduled to take place from 4 to 22 february 2022, in beijing and towns in the neighboring hebei province, china.[2]
beijing was elected as the host city in july 2015 at the 128th ioc session in kuala lumpur, malaysia. these games will be the first winter olympics ever to be held in china, the fourth winter olympics held in east asia, and the last of three consecutive olympics to be held in east asia, following the 2018 winter olympics in pyeongchang, south korea, and the 2020 summer olympics in tokyo, japan. with its previous hosting of the 2008 summer olympics, beijing will be the first city to have hosted both the summer and winter olympics: there are plans to utilize many of the same venues that were used for the 2008 games, including its indoor venues, and beijing national stadium (also known as the bird's nest) as ceremonies venue. beijing is also the second national capital to host the winter olympics, after oslo, norway in 1952.
the bidding calendar was announced by the ioc in october 2012, with the application deadline set for 14 november 2013. the ioc executive board reviewed the bids from all applicant cities on 7 july 2014, and selected three cities, oslo (norway), almaty (kazakhstan) and beijing (china) as the final candidates.
several cities withdrew their applications during the bidding process, citing the high costs or the lack of local support for hosting the games.[3] oslo, which had been considered the clear frontrunner, withdrew after its application to the norwegian parliament for funding of the olympics was rejected. public reception to the application for funding had been highly negative due to cost concerns after the cost overruns of the 2014 winter olympics in sochi, and especially revelations about a series of hospitality-related demands that had been reportedly made by the ioc. the demands notably included "diva-like demands for luxury treatment" for the ioc members themselves, such as special lanes on all roads only to be used by ioc members and a cocktail reception at the royal palace with drinks paid for by the royal family. several commentators pointed out that such demands were unheard of in a western democracy; slate described the ioc as a "notoriously ridiculous organization run by grifters and hereditary aristocrats."[4][5][6][7]
beijing was selected as host city of the 2022 winter olympics after beating almaty by four votes on 31 july 2015 at the 128th ioc session in kuala lumpur, malaysia.

in urban area of beijing, five ice events will be held at the olympic green, the capital indoor stadium and the beijing wukesong sports center, which were some of the main venues of the 2008 summer olympics. the big air snowboarding and freestyle skiing events will be held in a new area of urban development in shijingshan district, a district in urban area of beijing.[8]
competitions for luge, bobsleigh and alpine skiing will be held in xiaohaituo mountain area in yanqing district, northwest of urban area of beijing, 90 kilometres (56 miles) away from the city center, using artificial snow because of the rarity of natural snow in this region.[9][10]
all other skiing events will be held in taizicheng area in chongli district, zhangjiakou city, hebei province. it is 220 km (140 mi) from downtown beijing and 130 km (81 mi) away from xiaohaituo mountain area.[11]
yanqing district is a suburban district of beijing.
zhangjiakou is a city in hebei province. chongli district in zhangjiakou city will stage most of the skiing events during the 2022 winter olympics. the ski resort earned over 1.54 billion yuan (us$237.77 million) in tourism during the 2015–16 snow season for a 31.6% growth over the previous season. in 2016, it was announced that chongli received 2.185 million tourists, an increase of 30% from the previous season, during the first snow season after winning the olympic bid. the snow season lasted for five months from november, during which chongli has hosted thirty-six competitions and activities, such as far east cup and children skiing international festival. a total of twenty-three skiing camps have also been set up, attracting the participation of 3,800 youths. all venue construction started in november 2016 and will be finished by the end of 2020 to enable the city to hold test events.[15]
the new beijing-zhangjiakou intercity railway opened in late 2019, starting from beijing north railway station and ending at zhangjiakou railway station. it is built for speeds of up to 350 km/h (220 mph); travel time from beijing to zhangjiakou has decrease to around 50 minutes.
the beijing subway is expected to continue expanding and is projected to reach 1,000 km (620 mi) in length by 2022.[16]
a new airport for beijing and the surrounding region, beijing daxing international airport, opened in 2019. the airport replaced the beijing nanyuan airport and is operated together with the beijing capital international airport.[17]
the estimated budget for the games is us$3.9 billion, less than one-tenth of the $43 billion spent on the 2008 summer olympics.[18]
the 2022 winter olympics are scheduled to include a record 109 events over 15 disciplines in 7 sports.
numbers in parentheses indicate the number of medal events contested in each separate discipline.
in october 2016, the international ski federation (fis) announced plans to begin sanctioning women's competitions in nordic combined, with the objective of contesting the discipline at the olympic level for the first time in beijing.[19] in november 2017, a further three events were put forward by the fis for possible olympic inclusion: a ski jumping mixed team competition and men's and women's big air in freestyle skiing.[20]
at their may 2018 congress at the costa navarino resort in messenia, greece, fis submitted several additional events for consideration, including a proposal to make telemark skiing an olympic discipline for the first time in beijing, with proposed competitions to include the men's and women's parallel sprint and a mixed team parallel sprint. the congress also approved to submit the aerials mixed team event and several new snowboarding events: the men and women's snowboard cross team event; a mixed team alpine parallel event; the men's and women's parallel special slalom; and a mixed team parallel special slalom event.[21] the individual parallel special slalom events were featured at the 2014 winter olympics in sochi, russia, but were dropped from the olympic program in 2018 to make way for the snowboarding big air competitions.
the international luge federation (fil) has proposed the addition of six new events, including natural track luge (men's and women's singles), a women's doubles competition on the artificial track, and sprint events (men, women, and doubles) on the artificial track.[22][23]
the international skating union (isu) continues to campaign for the addition of synchronized skating as a new event within the discipline of figure skating.[24] they are also proposing a new short track speed skating mixed team event.[23]
in biathlon, a single mixed relay has been proposed by the international biathlon union (ibu) to complement the four-person mixed relay which featured at the 2018 winter olympics.[23] also, a new team event has been proposed by the international bobsleigh and skeleton federation (ibsf), and asumedly the women's monobob event, despite the recommendation from the federation's executive board to propose a four-women event.[23]
in july 2018, the ioc announced the addition of seven new events: women's monobob; freestyle skiing big air (men and women); mixed team events for freestyle skiing aerials, ski jumping, and snowboard cross; and the mixed relay in short track speed skating. this means a total of 109 events will be held.
the opening ceremony will be held on 4 february 2022. it will feature segments with culture of china, the parade of nations and the lighting of the olympic flame.
in may 2019 the iihf announced nine nations that had secured olympic qualification in the men's tournament.[25] as the host nation, china qualified teams automatically, thus making a total of ten teams per event in the curling tournaments.[26]
on 9 december 2019, the world anti-doping agency (wada) banned russia from all international sport for four years, after it found that the russian government had tampered with lab data that it provided to wada in january 2019 as a condition of its reinstatement of the russian anti-doping agency. as at the 2018 winter olympics, wada will allow individual cleared russian athletes to compete neutrally under a title to be determined. wada compliance review committee head jonathan taylor stated that the ioc would not be able to use "olympic athletes from russia" (oar) as it did in 2018, specifically emphasizing that neutral athletes are to not to be portrayed as representing russia.[27][28][29]

the closing ceremony will be held on 20 february 2022. the ceremony will include culture of china, the city's mayor chen jining will then handover the olympic flag from beijing to ioc president, thomas bach to the mayors of the host cities of the 2026 games: milan/cortina d'ampezzo, italy, guiseppe sala and gianpietro ghedina, and the extinguishing of the olympic flame.
the official emblem "winter dream" (冬梦) was unveiled on 15 december 2017 at the beijing national aquatics center. the emblem is a stylized rendition of the character "冬" (winter) inspired by winter snow, with a ribbon motif. the top is meant to resemble a skier and the bottom is meant to resemble a skater. the emblem also features the olympic colors (except black) and the chinese flag colors. the emblem was designed by lin cunzhen who also created the  nanjing 2014 logo.[30]
the games' slogan is joyful rendezvous upon pure ice and snow (chinese: 纯洁的冰雪，激情的约会).
the mascot "bing dwen dwen" (chinese: 冰墩墩; pinyin: bīng dūn dūn) was unveiled on 17 september 2019  at the shougang ice hockey arena and was designed by cao xue.[31]
the giant panda, is often regarded as one main symbols of china. its helmet is also indicative of the snow and ice of winter sports. the name "bing dwen dwen" is a combination of several meanings in the chinese language, with "bing" the chinese word for "ice", and "dwen dwen" meaning robust and lively. a creature not known for its agility, the giant panda is encased in a stylized sports iced suit meant to make the animal appear more athletic and winterish. his main feature he has a heart of gold heart from gold and love to all winter sports, this panda is ready to share with the whole world true spirit of the olympic games. the mascot resembles an astronaut, embracing new and green technologies for a future with infinite possibilities. the bands of color around its face are meant to represent connectivity, energy, green, and advanced technologies. along with the olympic mascot, the paralympic mascot was also revealed on the same day.[32][33]
in some countries, broadcast rights to the 2022 winter olympics are already agreed through existing long-term deals. in france and the united kingdom, these are the first games where eurosport will be the main rightsholder; the bbc will sub-license a limited amount of coverage on free-to-air television, as part of a deal in which the bbc sold the pay-tv rights to the 2018 and 2020 games to eurosport.[35][36] this will be the final olympic winter games to be broadcast by sbs in north and south korea this is because cable network jtbc will broadcast the games starting in 2026
in the united states, the games will  once again be broadcast by nbcuniversal properties as part of its multi-year agreement with the ioc. the 2022 edition of the super bowl—championship game of the national football league (nfl) and historically among the most-watched television broadcasts in the country annually—is tentatively scheduled during an ongoing olympics for the first time in its history. on 13 march 2019, it was announced that nbc had traded 2021's super bowl lv to cbs (which, alongside fox and nbc, alternate airing the super bowl on a three-year rotation) in favour of the 2022 games. holding rights to both events will prevent them from competing for viewership and advertising sales, and also allow nbc to create synergies and advertising packages for them (as it did during super bowl lii, which was played prior to the 2018 winter olympics and also televised by nbc).[37][38]
critics questioned the beijing bid, citing that the proposed outdoor venue sites do not have reliable snowfall in winter for snow sports. concerns have been raised that snow may need to be transported to the venues at great cost and with uncertain environmental consequences.[62][63]
the environmental impact of hosting the games near beijing has been questioned. some of the proposed venues will be adjacent to the beijing songshan national nature reserve and part of the same mountain system, and the environmental impact on the nature reserve of construction, and artificially covering parts of the mountain with snow, is uncertain.[64][65] the chinese government responded to these concerns by expanding the adjacent beijing songshan national nature reserve by 31% of its original size.[66]
in the aftermath of the 2019 leak of the xinjiang papers and the 2019 hong kong protests, calls were made for a boycott of the 2022 games.[67][68]
